 Hello. Joe. What's going on, man? Man. Good to see you. Thanks, thanks. I feel a little overdressed. Sorry about this. You look good. Oh, look at that. A little bit of starry night there. Yeah, you're really into that, huh? Oh, yeah, I got. I guess that's what's on your phone. So you remembered, yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's on the phone. Starry night. What do I like about starry night? It's not what Van Gogh saw that night. It's what he felt. How do you know what he felt? Because this is not a representation of reality. Oh. And anything that deviates from reality is reality that has filtered through your senses. And I think art at its highest is exactly that. If this was an exact depiction of reality, it would be a photograph and I don't need the artist. Hmm. Okay. So even photographs that take you to a slightly other kind of dimension as you gaze upon them, it's more than what was actually going on at the time. And that's art taken to the craft of photography. That's why you like it? That's one of the reasons why. Plus I think it was the very first painting where its title is the background. Think about that. This could have been called, you know, in the full painting, obviously this is a snippet. I know. Yeah. So there's a town there. There's a Cypress tree. There's a church steeple. It could have been called Cypress tree. It could have been called Sleepy Village. It could have been called Rolling Hills. But no, it's called Starry Night. And everything in front of it, everything in front of it is just in the way. And how often do you paint something where the title is the background? That's my point. And in this particular case, the background is the universe. And so for me, this was a pivot point in art. And it's 1889, which is recent, given the history of paintings, and you know, that go all the way back. So, yeah, there it is. Is that your favorite painting ever? I have to say yes. You have to be a vest and a fine cow. If it's not, what are you doing? I have four or five ties that have this painting on them in different ways. Yeah, so I'm all in. I'm all in. What's interesting is that the town is... Have you seen Starry Night in Bacon? Somebody did it. Look, dig it up on the screen. Somebody did it in Bacon. It was just cr... Oh, god. How weird. Yeah, so... How weird. Go back to the original one, please. What's interesting about the original one is that the town is realistically depicted. The trees are recognizable as trees. If you ever saw a sky that looked like that, the end would be here. Yeah, exactly. Plus that swirling is not wind, and it's not clouds, because if it was clouds, you wouldn't see the stars. Right. It's how he felt. That's all I can tell you. By the way, that is a real evening. Sorry, it's not even the early morning. The crescent moon, when it's that orientation, means this is before sunrise. And that white object lower on the horizon, that sort of glowy, that's very likely Venus, and that enables us to trace over what's set of weeks this painting was actually painted. So it's kind of like forensic astronomy. Has anyone done an analysis of where he must have been? Yeah, yeah, it's well known. He was in a real place. And so that really... He had pulled this out of his ass, right? I mean, it was... He painted what he saw, folded into what he felt. Yeah. Heavy. That's how art should be, I think. Yeah. Otherwise, what do you need artists for? Make cool shit. The cool stuff is something that they felt, and it came out of them. Yeah. And they feel stuff. They feel the natural world in ways different from the rest of us. And that's why they're artists. Do they or do they just express it with... Oh, sorry. Yes, they not only... Yes, we all can feel it, but to be able to express it, that's a whole other talent. Right, just a question. You know what I think about often? Why do we all know who Paul Revere is? All right? We all... It's a household name. Yet is there any other war ever fought in the history of the world where a household name is the name of the person who told other people the enemy was coming? We can mention his name, but we can't list the generals that all fought in that war. Why? It's because a poem was written about him. And he had this mundane job, let me tell people the enemy is coming. And so the artist, in this case, the poet elevated the mundane to something that forces you to... to reckon it with your understanding of this world. What's Joyce Kilmer's most famous poem? It's about a tree. Dogs piss on trees. You drive by trees, you don't even know they're there. Yet a poem about a tree. I'll never see something as lovely as a tree. Oh my gosh. So the art forces you to pause and just reflect on things that you took for granted. Things that became ordinary in your life. And they were elevated to... To... They get beatified by the talents of artists. That's a word. Oh, beatified, you never knew? Beatified, yeah, I'm using it loosely. It's the intermediate step between being an ordinary person and being a saint. The beatification of someone in the Catholic Church. I would have thought it's making something more beautiful. Oh, mate, okay, I don't... It could have similar roots. Similar roots, beat, beat, beat. Yeah, yeah, it could come from that. But, to be beatified is the first steps on root to sainthood. Yeah. That's if I remember the word correctly. Here goes. Oh, you got it. Oh, you got it. You've pulled it up. The definition. To make supremely happy, Christianity declared to have attained blessedness of heaven and authorize the title blessed. And limited public religious honor. She was beatified six years after her death. Yes, so I think you can't become a saint unless you previously been beatified. I think that's the rule. But I'm looking at the number one definition of there to make supremely happy. That's interesting. That's interesting. Yeah, that moved ahead of it. Definition of beatify. Yeah. So to be out of fire, the verb was up there. You had on the screen Roman Catholic Church. He beatified Juan Diego and Indian believed to have a vision of a virgin Mary. Synonyms, canonized, sanctified, hollow, consecrate. So I think if you take something ordinary and you subject it to the interpretation of an artist, it can be beatified and elevated on a level where it becomes a household recognition of its importance in this world. So my brothers and artists, my brothers and artists. What kind of art? A fine art, but also paints and teaches history of art. So I've had this sort of baptism my whole life being exposed to him. You know, the sibling scientist. But they have an artist in the family. Everyone should have an artist in the family. I've got an uncle. And of course the whole steam movement, science, technology, engineering, and math. The artist got in there and said, wait, so the STEM movement, science, engineering, they want to throw in the A. They get art as part of that movement, science, technology, engineering, art, and math. Change it from STEM to steam. It's a steam. So you get full steam ahead. And you get a lot of work in that. Well, they're both good words for what they need. But that just sounds like a bunch of awesome stuff. It does. And I'm not throwing comedy and building houses. It seems like you're getting very... It's like the LBGTQA. AI. Things get really squirrely when you start adding more letters. Yeah, you can add letters, but if it doesn't spell anything, then the memorization has to kick in. But steam, you don't have to memorize that. It's already there for you. So it's cleverly conceived. I think the abbreviation was its tacit recognition that these are elements in society that advance civilization and grow the economy, actually. So in fact, there's hardly any growth economy in the world that isn't growing because it hasn't... Not having been touched by science or technology. Everything. Just think about it. So if you're around running... You don't have them on your show, but if you're on a mountain saying, I don't like science, science is bad, science is evil. Okay, well then you will die in poverty. If you elect officials who believe that as well. Well, the fuck thinks that science is bad in 2019. And how did they express this? Did they express it through science? Okay, so... You know what I'm saying? Like are they saying it online? I have a book coming out in a month called Letters from an Astrophysicist. Okay, it's not out yet. I've got it. It's not how did you get a copy of it? But I don't even have my copy yet. Okay. What I'm saying is in there, there's a whole chapter on just angry people who don't like anything including science. And one of them... it's a riff. He just said, I hate it. And that science brings some of the worst things that's ever happened to humanity and pollution and this goes on and on and on and on. And so I reply. It's Letters from an Astrophysicist and I reply as calmly and rationally as possible when you get attacked that way. But what I'm saying is not everyone embraces everything that science does. And some will cherry pick it. You have the science deniers for Global Warming, you have science deniers with vaccines, you have science deniers with GMOs. There's all manner of science denying going on in modern society. And you know, we in a free society, what are you going to do? Right? People can think what they want. But if thinking what they want influences policy, which then affects everybody, then your science denial has consequences to the economic health of the nation. And by the way, it's not only economics, it's your... the economic health, it's your physical health, because medicine flows through advances in science, as well as our security. Well, there's people that deny some aspects of science while conveniently using other. That's where it gets weird, right? You're driving a car that's relying on GPS. You're using a phone to complain about the Global Warming hoax. You know, you're... Correct. One of my more sort of popular tweets was, remember when we had the photo of the black hole from a distant galaxy. And it was banner headlines, maybe a year ago, less than a year ago. Banner headlines. And first photo ever of a black hole. And it was an astounding engineering achievement to accomplish that. It was multiple telescopes all around the world pooling the data to get it right. And it was one of the greatest collaborative efforts we've ever undertaken in my field of astrophysics. Okay. And everybody was loving the results. So all I tweeted was, Scientist report first photo of a black hole. Public. Ooh. Ah. Scientist report humans are warming the earth. Oh, you brought it up. Okay. Scientist. We produce the first ever image of a supermassive black hole 55 million light years away. The response. Ooh. Scientist. We've concluded that humans are catastrophically warming the earth. Response. That conflicts with what I want to be true so it must be false. Well, that is the cherry picking of science. It is the cherry picking of science. But the global warming thing is very much connected to a certain type of ideology. It does certain type of person thinks of the, some sense. It doesn't matter to me. No nonsense person. What I'm saying. What, yes, it does matter. What I'm, what I'm trying to say is that is a demographic that has cherry picked science to deny human cause global warming. There are other demographics that have cherry picked other science to deny other things. And it's not all located in one political spectrum. I mean, one political branch. Right. So you tend to find liberal folk complaining that the conservatives who have embraced know the global warming platform are denying science and they need science on their side. And many of those same people are rubbing crystals together to be healed by the crystal energy. Or they're denying vaccines, thinking that there's somehow bad for you. And so, so all of this requires some or total rejection of mainstream science. And we're living in that world now. And I don't know. I don't think it'll stop the progress of civilization, but it can certainly slow it down and occasionally stall it. Well, that is certainly a problem, but how big of a problem is it? Like how many people are really in denial of science in 2019? It's got to be for me. For me, in a free country, that's no one matters. What matters is in a free country that you elect officials who are not. Officials. Yes, you elect people who are scientifically literate. Yeah. They don't have to be scientists. And if they're not scientifically literate, they should be self-aware of that. And then listen to people who are. Right. So, don't you think what they're doing though is they're doing what their constituents would like them to do? That's why I don't beat politicians over the head. Ever. I don't do that. We're a republic, we're a democracy. Whatever they believe, if they think Earth is 6,000 years old, and they got elected, it's because the people elected them believe they're Earth is 6,000 years old. Or because they're willing to let that one go because they believe in the policies. Oh, possibly. That's a good point because you have a portfolio of thoughts and beliefs. Or because you're such a profound Christian. I mean, he's so profoundly Christian that he just wants to live in a literal position. There are plenty of Christians who are connected to science that don't, including the Pope. By the way, can you get more Christian than the Pope? Yeah, he believes in science now. This new Pope is pretty interesting. Yeah, if you read his encyclical from a couple of years ago, it's a scientifically literate. It's a literate document. Yeah. And no, there's, okay, so it's not, he's still religious, right? So Jesus still rose from the dead, and there was still miracles and all the rest of that in the New Testament. So he's not in denial of that. But given that, he is saying, oh my gosh, here's something, we, the religious community, and scientists can partner behind, and that is we want to save life on Earth. And so we have to be better shepherds of what is going on on this Earth. And one of them is we don't want to flood low-lying countries in the South Pacific, where the average sea level is 10 feet above sea level, or whatever it is. You're going to lose these countries if you keep melting our, our, our, um, the ice caps, because that would include a North, and there's no land in the North. So the glacier ice, that's land-based ice, right? Because any ice that's in the water floating, that can melt and it's not going to change the water level. So it's why you can do this experiment. It's really cool. Fill up your glass, put some, a few cubes of ice in a glass of water, fill the glass up as much as you possibly can without spilling it. And the ice is bobbing above that level. Okay, because ice is about 10% buoyant on that. About 10% of an ice cube will be lifted above. This, this is the, this is the iceberg equation, right? That's the tip of the iceberg. Well, you see the 10% above and 90% is not visible to you. This is, by the way, I don't want to get too many off-ramps here, but that's one of the things that they did right in Titanic. Okay, if you look at the earliest Titanic movie, there was in black and white. They see this huge iceberg on the horizon, and then it can't swear away from it, because it, oh my gosh, it doesn't have to know. No, no. The iceberg that cuts the bottom of your boat is a little bit of ice sticking out above the water, because 90% of it is underwater. And that's where the damage occurs. And in the James Cameron Titanic, the iceberg that they hit above water was looks like a little chunk of ice. Oh, that couldn't hurt anything. All the damage was under word. Anyhow, so back to this. So do this experiment, and then let the glass sit there and let the ice melt. And the water levels stay the same, because when ice melts, it takes a lower volume than it was when it became ice. And that's why pipes break. I thought pipes break just because the water expands. Yeah, I just described that in the opposite direction. Oh, right. Oh, so because as it freezes it, but it didn't know it gets larger. That's what expansion means. What kind of, what's with your vocabulary here? No, but I'm saying like, no, no, right. So your ice cube is sitting 10% larger. Your ice cube is sitting 10% above the water level, and it melts and becomes water. The water takes up 90% of the volume of the ice. So that just melts back into the water, and it doesn't overflow, even though it was sticking above the water line when you had the glass. So now let's do the opposite. There's water in the pipes. Can I tell you something that might blow your mind? No. Sure. Is that allowed? How many times does your mind, at least once a day? Yeah, at least one. You need your mind blown. Okay. Here's how it works. Okay. So let's put water in the pipes. Okay. And then the temperature drops. Now pipes have a certain strength. Right. Copper pipes, you know, they're rigid. Okay. Now we'll have them around breaking pipes. Okay. So now watch. We have to choose. So the water is in there, and now the temperature begins to drop. Okay. Um, the water wants to turn to ice, but it can't because the pipe is containing it. So it just sits there. Okay. At 32 degrees as water, even though the temperature outside is dropping below 32 degrees. Okay. And it still sits there. I guess the 30 degrees, 29, the pipe is squeezing the attempt of this water to become ice. And the act of squeezing it prevents the temperature from dropping. Okay. And you, the temperature drops depending on how strong the pipe is, and the temperature gradient across it, as the outside temperature continues, it gets to now 25 degrees. The pipe is still holding on to the liquid water. And it's still 32 degrees inside there. And it holds on to, and it's keeps happening. It keeps happening. You get a point where the pipe can no longer contain the water. And the water freezes spontaneously. It just goes right down to that temperature, and the pipe is helpless in the face of this. So the point is the stronger the pipe is, the lower the temperature has to be outside for the freezing water to break it. So theoretically, if you had a pipe that was made of a stronger material than copper, you can get even lower than that. You get even lower temperatures. How low can you get? Because when things freeze, they have to expand? So watch. Not only when water freezes. Why does water expand when it's a remarkable fact about water that is shared by very few other ingredients. Most things when they cool, they shrink as all men know. Oh, man. So most materials, because things cooler, they're vibrating molecules slow down, and they take up less space. Water is the opposite of that as it passes down through. So I'm going to describe to you an extraordinary fact about water and why we're alive today. So watch. Let's take a lake that has fish in it. Temperature drops outside. And the lake slowly begins to get cooler, because there's a time lag between the air temperature and the waters. That's why the first freeze, the lake is still there. It's got to be cold longer. So what happens? The water gets cold on the surface. Okay? And it begins to... Okay, the water gets cold on the surface and it begins to shrink. So that water is shrink. That makes a denser it falls to the bottom. Fine. It does that down to about four degrees Celsius. As it goes from four degrees Celsius to zero degrees Celsius, the freezing point, it begins to expand and become less dense than the water. So now, as the water wants to actually freeze, it stays on top. When it does freeze, you freeze the top surface of the lake. Well, how about the water below it? It's insulated from the dropping air temperature and the fish don't die. Imagine if ice were denser than water. What would happen? You'd freeze the top layer, it would sink. The bottom is frozen. Freeze the next layer. It sinks and fish would be systematically forced to swim in shallower and shallower waters until they were all freeze dried on the top surface of the lake. And all fishes would be dead every winter in every lake. I think it's fish. What? I think you're supposed to say fishes. Fishes is a double plural. You could do that? You never heard fish would be dead? You never heard. Would you say all deers? Well, because generally, if you had multiple kinds of deer, so if you had, like, sit, kiddie, and white. But it's rare that they're all in the same place. Generally, one kind of deer won't play. But the ocean has many kind of fish in the same place. That's interesting. So you would say fishes. Fishes is a double plural. It's different kinds of plural fish. Oh, yeah. Double below my mind. You did not, you did not. Oh, no, no, no. I didn't know. I never thought about that way. The many fishes in the, oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so sorry. Fishes in the sea. Yeah. So, multiple plurals of different kinds of fish. How close we have to get where ocean water freezes? Because that's where it starts. Well, it's saltwater. Do you have the fishes up there? Some weird anomaly that happened where there was two little oxygen in the water, and somehow the frozen fish got pushed out in a wall of ice. There's a South Dakota. Wow. So there's two little oxygen because I don't know. I can't explain that. I don't know what happened there. If you look at the green in the water, most likely it's algae. So that happens with certain lakes that get polluted with certain types of algae. But you kill the lake by doing that. You kill the lake. Well, you get it in the ocean too. You get these zones. But I don't see how you get frozen fish, though. That's incredible. But, yeah. So, stop. Go back up. Yeah. Scroll down so you can read it. Fish frozen in a wall of ice in South Dakota's lake and these national wildlife refuge. That's incredible, man. Is that a video, Jamie? Yeah. I think it's just a picture, though. I don't know how they froze because they can just swim to where it's not frozen. So I'd have to do more homework on that one to see what caused that. Wow. So my point is because of this property of water, that ice floats, it insulates the bottom layers of the lake and fish can survive over the winter because of this work. That's how it's used to, right? Insulates. You can inside, you get a nice, large bottle. Oh, sure. Yeah. I mean, if you put a barrier between you and the changing elements outside, that's basically an insulating layer. Do you have ever got ice fishing? No, I never know. I'm a New York City- It's a good way to get a new wife. Well, they have them in New York City. People go ice fishing, I'm sure, and Central Park. Do women go ice fishing to get away from their husbands? They do. Yeah, okay. Well, there. It's like, why do people golf? Okay. Ice fishing is particularly weird because you have to continually scoop out the ice and maybe even drill again. Right. So that works because frozen water is less dense than non-frozen water, and it's one of the rare ingredients for which that's so. And it's likely there would be no life on land or anywhere on earth if that were the case. If the opposite of that were the case. So water is a very special ingredient to life on earth. It's cited by many religious folks as saying, see, earth is sacred for these, it's in the list of special ingredients for what make earth habitable for life. That is a really strange thing though that if you can contain it somehow in an incredibly strong pipe, it won't freeze. Yes, it won't freeze. What is a temperature variant though? Is there a number? Well, that's why pipes don't freeze when it just hits 30 degrees outside. That's not when you hear it. It freezes when it gets really low. When it crack. Yeah, then it'll break the copper like it's paper. No. It'll tear it like it's not. Now, on the flip side of that, try this at home. Take an ice cube that's like at 30 degrees. How would you measure that? Pull out an ice cube because there'll be it near zero Fahrenheit if you have a good freezer. Just pull out and leave it on the counter. Put it on a wooden cutting board. Let it sit there for like 10 minutes and its temperature will come up. There'll be a point where it hasn't melted yet, but you can take it and squeeze the ice cube and you can force it to melt by squeezing it. Because you're forcing it into a smaller volume that it currently contains. The only way you can accomplish that is if the ice turns to water, then it will occupy a smaller volume. The act of squeezing ice can actually melt it. If you had some sort of a pipe that could physically constrict, like something that had threads in it that could wind down to a smaller size, you could stick a cylinder of ice in it and you could slowly crank it down. Oh, yes, yes. It would melt. Yes, you can melt. You have some machine that squeezed ice and the colder the ice is, the harder it would be for you to squeeze it to accomplish that. It's sort of fun with ice. In fact, you know what else you can do? This is a harder experiment to do. If you take a mesh, like a screen mesh, that's to be sort of wider openings than a screen door would. So what would this be? Like a fence, like a chain link fence. So hold it horizontally and get a big block of ice and just place it on top. A block of ice that's heavy. What will happen is the ice, the weight of the ice will melt the ice in the contact points of the chain itself because it's feeling that pressure to squeeze into a smaller volume. But by the time it melts, the ice has now passed through the grate and it will refreeze on the other side. So you can actually pass a block of ice through a chain link fence vertically just by pushing it. Yeah, it's pretty cool. It's a slow experiment, but it's real. How long? I mean, it depends on the temperature of the ice and how much it weighs because the pressure is what, this is why you can ice skate. Why can you skate on ice? Because the edge of the blade is very high pressure on the ice and it's melting a bead of water. Especially gliding on water when you're skating. You're not skating on slippery ice. Really? Yes. I thought you were just cutting the ice with the blade. Well, so the blade have you ever seen a sharpened blade? It's not just flat. There's actually a concave cross section to it. So each edge, the left edge and the right edge is basically a knife edge. Not quite as sharp as a knife, but you can feel how it's sharp so that when you lean on that edge, either you're inner edge or outer edge, your entire body weight is being held up on a very narrow surface area of the blade. So the pressure is extreme. It's like, you know, thousand pounds per square inch. You don't weigh a thousand pounds, but you're not skating on a square inch, right? So you do the math on that and what you can have is you will skate and you're actually, it makes it so slippery on ice skates is because you're moving on a bead of water that frees us right behind you as you go past it. Dude. Yeah. So it's possible for ice to be so cold you can't really skate on it because even that pressure is not enough to melt it. How cold would it have to be? Last I did a calculation was really cold, like tens of degrees below zero. How does dry ice work? Oh, it's just frozen carbon dioxide. That's all. So here's the difference. Here's the difference. It's frozen H2O and a block of frozen CO2. So there there are. It turns out the air pressure on earth is high enough at sea level is high enough to allow the ice to melt and sustain a liquid state. Okay. It's CO2 under air pressure, normal air pressure. It wants to melt but it can't sustain a liquid and it goes straight to gas. If we had much higher air pressure, you could have CO2 melt and have liquid CO2. So now watch what happened. So can I blow your mind again? This is just this is really good stuff. Okay. It's good like physical chemistry. So here you go. So watch what happens. So what happens if I reduce the air pressure? Okay. Well the transition from ice to water is still the same. It's not affected but the boiling point is affected. As you know, cooking times have to be adjusted on mountain tops because when you boil water it's not 212 degrees. Depending on the height of the mountain, there's less air pressing down that's preventing it from boiling. Okay. The boiling point is not some absolute fact about the water. What you have to do is what the air pressure is sitting above it. If you have extremely high air pressure, water has to go to much higher temperature before it boils. So the boiling point of water that's reported in all textbooks is at sea level, at one atmospheric pressure. That's how you get 212 degrees. If you start reducing the atmospheric pressure, it's 210 degrees, 205 degrees, 200 degrees, 190 degrees, 180 degrees. 180 degrees. Oh! Yes. I thought as 212 degrees, she got to cook the food longer. All cooking times are increased for this reason. So now watch, I'm not done with you. Let's keep reducing the air pressure. Okay. Theoretical? Well, like possible on earth. No, no. Himalayas. Yeah, but or take it up. You can ascend in some kind of copter or some kind of device, or air balloon, whatever. But I'm saying you can do this experiment in a laboratory. Okay. So reducing the air pressure, boiling point keeps dropping. It's 170 degrees, 150, 120, 100 degrees Fahrenheit, 80 degrees Fahrenheit, 50 degrees Fahrenheit, 40 degrees Fahrenheit, 32 degrees Fahrenheit. Holy shit. What happens? The ice melts and becomes water. The water evaporates and becomes steam, and all of that's happening at 32 degrees. There is an atmospheric pressure for which water, ice, and steam coexist. And it's called the triple point of water. And all ingredients have a triple point. Wow. And Mars is very close to the triple point of water. So you can have a simultaneous bath in certain regions of Mars. Simultaneous bath because the air pressure is so low. It's like 100 earth's air pressure. It's very, very low. So you know a place where a pot of water, ice cubes, and steam are coming out all at once. It's at the triple point. So so so here's the lesson here is we live life in our world. At one atmospheric pressure, at one room temperature atmospheric pressure, and we'd define what is normal based on that life experience, based on how our senses interact with that environment. But the actual universe is far freaky than what we that what our senses are exposed are five senses are exposed to on earth. What did you think about Elon Musk's idea about nooking the poles of Mars in order to make it warmer? Yeah. So some of these are kind of pying the sky ideas. But let's let's get to what he's trying to get at. What you want to do is you want to introduce warmth. You want to block the ozone, you want to block the ultraviolet so that you can protect organic life. Right. So we have an ozone layer. The three oxygen atoms, oh three, and oxygen ozone likes ultraviolet light. So ultraviolet light comes from the sun and gets eaten by ozone. It gets eaten. And when you do that, the ultraviolet light doesn't make it to earth surface. So even though they say, where where sunscreen and sunblock 45, yes, that's for the 1% of the ultraviolet that gets through the atmosphere. If you're above the atmosphere, you are fried. So because ultraviolet is highly hostile to organic molecules and what we're made of as life. So you want to protect, you want to give life a chance. So you want to not only heat Mars, you want to find a way to block the ultraviolet light coming from the sun. So you need some mechanism if not ozone or it just live underground, for example. And so I don't think we should think of the idea as a literal thing, but just it's a general principle of what you want to accomplish on Mars in doing so. So you want to warm it. You want to protect what could be the future of biochemistry and then you seed it and then you wait. You don't want to wait too long. You want it to speed it up if you could. And then you terraform Mars. SpaceX has, I visited him a couple of times. He's got a mug you can buy there. Then it has Mars on it. Okay. And then you put hot liquid in it and Mars turns to an arable blue green marble. So yes, very good. And it doesn't tell you that when you, so I got a Mars mug, you know, and you show it off and oh my gosh, what did that happen? It's an earth mug, but it doesn't look like earth. There's a lot of people that go on. Also, we think there's a lot of water that was once on Mars, which is a certainty. We think it's just sitting below in a permafrost. So you wouldn't have to bring water to Mars. By the way, in the really distant future, you can just redirect a comet and get all the water you need. But how far distance is that? The comet's everywhere, dude. We're in a shooting gallery. Yeah, that's not what I asked. Oh, how far away do you think it is before we could redirect our way in time? Yes. Okay, sorry. Oh, my gosh. We know how to do it, but there's no real incentive. So there's no engineering, funded engineering plan to do it, but we know how to do it on paper. We know how to do it in a conceivable way? Oh, yeah. So first of all, it happens without us, because we are in the shooting path of countless thousands of asteroids and comets. So what you would do is you'd find one that's headed close to us anyway in the seventh orbit down the line or the hundredth orbit down the line. And then you'd slightly deflect it in such a way that it would then collide with Mars or even Earth if you wanted. If Earth needed some more fresh water. Yeah, I heard that there's a possibility. But it's a state. The problem is, if something really big that would fill lakes, whether that collided with Earth, that would just be bad for life on Earth. It's a spontaneous deposit of energy that can change the climate and do it. So you want to do that on a planet that you're trying to terraform. Isn't that the speculation of how water got here in the first place? So if the jury's still out on that, there's their tags in the oceans in the water molecule that tell you that the water must have come from more than one source. So that's what's confusing things. We want it to be a simple thing. It all came by comets or it all came from inside the Earth through volcanoes. volcanoes emit lakes and historically lakes and oceans worth of water just out of their Calderas. So the problem is, as we say in science, overdetermined. There's plenty of comets to have delivered all the water. There's plenty of water that could have come out of volcanoes to give us all the water. But in the oceans, it's clearly a mixture. And so the final word is still out on that. What do you think about what's going on now with the protesting of the building of this largest and latest telescope? Yes, the TMT 30-meter telescope, which should be the largest ever by far of any kind of telescope. The history of astronomy is one where bigger telescopes become bigger buckets to collect light. That's the only telescopes today are the same as telescopes when they were invented. They're just bigger. The principle behind them is bigger because what they're doing is simple. All you're trying to do is get as much light as possible. And the more light you get, the dimmer is the object you can detect and the farther away is the object you can see. And so for every generation of new large telescopes that have been built, it has increased and deepened our understanding of our place in the universe. So that's just the background. The proposal is for a 30-meter telescope largest ever on the big island of Hawaii in Montague where there are other telescopes there. That's where the Keck is, right? Yeah, I think where the Keck is, I think they cited it in a place that sort of tucked behind most sight lines to it. But that's not so much what's important here. It's that a native Hawaiians from what I've read view the mountain as a sacred place. And so to put a telescope, yet another telescope there becomes sort of invasion of sacred land. And so yeah, there's a standoff last I looked. I mean, people protesting in the streets. And there's some native Hawaiians who embrace this because it means jobs, high quality jobs, engineering jobs because you got to build it, you got to maintain it. There's an entire supportive infrastructure for that that means jobs. And it's done in collaboration with the University of Hawaii. And all the other telescopes are partnered with the University of Hawaii where people are educated there. And so at the end of the day, you have to ask, well, how are you going to make decisions going forward? Are you going to make them democratically? Then you take a vote. Do you want the natives to be the deciders of their own fate? And is that democratic? Okay, so in the natives vote, okay? Or is it the few people who are protesting? Do they win the day? I mean, it's complicated. And it's very, there's a lot of nuanced issues going on there. There's a branch of thinking that the United States government and normal municipal leaders have no authority over it. There's some who claim that this is native Hawaiian property that does not belong to any municipal entity of the US government. So therefore, even state representatives have no say. Right? So there's a lot going on there, okay? But if I were to weigh in, this is how I would do so, okay? I would say first, I think what should happen is, I don't know if they even have, if the infrastructure, I don't know how the system is set up. But if they could set it up this way, if the mountain is viewed as sacred by the natives, the natives should have entire say of what happens to the mountain, okay? That's how I think that should be. So now, what you want to make sure is that whatever decision gets made and voted upon by the natives, that is fully informed. You don't want to vote being misinformed or under informed. In any election, let alone whether you're voting for a telescope on your sacred mountain, okay? Otherwise, you're voting out of nowhere, right? You're not influencing your future based on partial information and decisions based on partial information are bad decisions no matter what, okay? So I would say, hold a vote with the natives and make sure everybody's fully informed. And here's a bit of information I just want to add to the information, okay? You know what we do as astrophysicists. We study the universe rather passively at that. We sit there at the end of a telescope and wait for light to reach us. It's not a petri dish where we stir it or heat it or freeze it or crack it or we're just kind of there, communing with the cosmos. My PhD thesis was significantly fed by data that I obtained from mountain tops at telescopes. I've got my data from mountains in Chile, Cetertololo and it employed all the natives, the local people. That's another telescope. So there's all these telescopes that all have specific access points to the universe. They're not all asking the same questions. And so it's the collection of all the data that gives us the complete understanding of what we think is a complete understanding of the universe. So what we do is try to understand our place in the universe. And all I'm going to say is that if you have power over what happens on that mountain and it's sacred to you because whatever that is, it is something important to you and your sense of your understanding of your place in this world, that's would be spiritual significance. I can tell you that what we learn as astrophysicists from those mountain tops gives us a deeper understanding of who and what we are in this universe. So I would say that whatever is your concept of God, be it the creator of the universe, the spirit energy that pervades all of space and time, whatever is your concept, the discoveries of astrophysicists bring you closer to it. I get your perspective. Let me be the opposing view. They feel... I'm not trying to... No, I know you don't. This is just information. I'm putting... This is information and I walk out of the room and then you all vote. I'm not... We believe in democracy here and majority rules. That's kind of a good thing. It's kind of worked. But if it's not majority rules, I don't know how they're going to make decisions. But let's say invent a future where the natives vote. If they vote, I want to make sure they heard what I just said and now take control of your own fate. I just don't think they care. I think they've decided that that's a sacred space and they don't want anybody doing anything to it. Then that's their decision. They're decision. You think that's okay? I don't judge people's... But if you wanted to make a convincing appeal to them. No, all I would say is what I just told you. That's it. That is all I would tell them. And when they vote, I want them to understand that fact. I could take it one step further and say, mountain tops, because of the access they give astrophysicists and by proxy us all to the universe, are sacred places to scientists. Okay? Now, it's not sacred in a religious sense, but it's sacred in a... In terms of a pathway to knowing and understanding who and what we are in this universe, we place great value on that. But it's not our land. It's... So specifically, these things have taken place. Your opinions didn't come to Hawaii and find legions of scientists they're conducting experiments. Okay? They found native peoples governing themselves. So that's that. And in consequence, if it gets voted down and that's permanent and there's no way around that, that telescope is still going to be built. It just won't be built in Hawaii. Well, where will it be built? They'll have to be built on mountain tops? Yeah, so there are other mountain tops. An elevation issue, right? Yeah, you want to be above, you know, schmutzie clouds and haze and... You want to dry environments so there's less rain. I went to the clouds. You visited. Yeah, very good. Like more than 10 years ago, the first time. And it was... I got very fortunate. It was a night where the moon was not out. Yes. The moon is not this. The astronomers' favorite thing. Yeah, you want the darkest sky you can. We were worried as we were driving up there that was really cloudy. But we drove through the clouds. We got to the top. And we got to the observatory and it was the most amazing without telescopes. There was telescopes there, but without telescopes. It was the most amazing view of the sky I'd ever seen in my life. And it changed my perspective of our place in the universe. This is what we do. We were on a spaceship. Like we were flying through the universe because of the diffused lighting on the big island because it's all set up so that it doesn't ruin what they're trying to accomplish at the cat. Mm-hmm. When you went up there. Minimized reflections in the wrong place. It's amazing. Not only that, if there was a moon out and you did ascend up through the clouds, the moon light illuminates the clouds and you are an island in the middle of white cotton. Yeah. And you're not even connected to the earth. It's what you imagine Mount Olympus would have been. I've been up there for that when that happens. With the gods up there and it's kind of, it's their place. It's there. So, so, yes. And so any, my brethren, my fellow astrophysicists who have also observed from mountain tops, by the way, it's becoming a lost art because, well, not, it's not lost, but it's becoming something we don't do anymore. Something called service observing. Will you put in your observing program and it's handed to a technician at the telescope who points the telescope, gets the data and sends it back to you. So the next generation doesn't have the experience that my generation did because there was a pilgrimage to the top of the mountain and you converted your life's path. You converted your life's schedule to become nocturnal. And in so doing, you, you know, this is the journey was long enough because you're in the middle of nowhere. Now you got to go nocturnal and by the time you're ready for this, you are communing with the cosmos. It is you, the detector, the telescope, and the universe. And there's an eerie silence up there too because you don't hear any, the hum of maybe the, the, the, the motor or the telescope, but that's it. So all I'm saying is if they choose to not have it, the telescope will go somewhere else. One of them is the Canary Islands. These are also volcanic hill tops, not as high as, as Mount Akeia, as at 14,000 feet, by the way. I should have checked what temperature water boils at the top of Mount Akeia. We could have rounded that story out. But I think it's around 180 degrees actually. I think I did actually calculate it one time. So, so you'd find a mountaintop and we'll put it somewhere else and the data won't be as good. But that'll be a consequence of it and none of that will go to Hawaii. How do you think that's going to get resolved though if you had a guess? I don't know. I, I, I just don't know. A lot of people are against it, including Jason Mamoah, Aquaman's against it. Oh, uh huh. He's out there protesting. Yeah. And so when you get celebrity types to put the weight of their name behind it, it, it magnifies the cause of others, even if they're in the minority. No. And so I, like I said, I think natives should, I, has everyone know who all the natives are? Is there, is there some listing so that they can all vote for this one thing? You wouldn't want people voting who are not native. If you're voting on whether it's so sacred, you don't want to put a telescope there. You'd want people who have a, a, an indigenous, um, an indigenous, um, an indigenous, um, concern for what goes on there and indigenous and reference to why is relative. Every, every usage of the word indigenous is relative. Yeah, especially with Hawaii because I mean, the only indigenous people are black people in Africa. Yeah. Okay. Because life, human life began in Africa. You, everyone else traveled to where they were. So, so native, it's, you set a time frame to declare what is native and what's not. And a native, and it's, in its simplest form is, are you born there? So I'm a native New Yorker. I'm born there. But I wasn't the original settler there. I would, my species did not form on Manhattan Island. So everybody traveled to where they are. They just got there before the Europeans. And so that has become the definition of indigenous art. Were you there when the Europeans landed, then you're indigenous? But to other life forms on that, on that rock, on that, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, Hawaii's or volcanic, it's a volcanic, um, archipelago. Um, you know how that happens, by the way? You have all these multiple volcanoes in a string, in a string. You ever wonder why? How, how that happens? Sure. You, you did wonder where you do, you know, do you know why? Oh, because there's a hotspot beneath Earth's crust. And it's just sitting there, okay? And when you're beneath Earth's crust, stuff doesn't move around the way it does on Earth's crust. Earth's crust shifts, okay? So that hotspot, Gurgles up, makes a volcano, then the hotspot goes dormant, but the con, the, the shelf still drifts. You still have continental drift. So it drifts, then the hotspot says, time for me to gurgle again, and it gurgles up, now you get another volcano. And then it goes dormant, that volcano goes dormant, it shifts, you get another one. And the time you see a chain of islands, guaranteed they're made by volcanoes, over enough time for continental drift to it shifted the plates over the hotspot of Earth's mantle. So do you think what they're concerned with is the eventual spoiling of this beautiful natural resource that slowly, but surely people are putting up houses there and developments and all these different things. One of the scientists are saying, we need this sacred land because we're going to put a volcano and they're like, look, this is already a, I mean, we're going to put a telescope, there's already a telescope up here, enough. Do you think that's what it is, they're trying to halt the progress of civilization, or I mean, maybe progress is a bad word, the expansion of civilization. Yeah, I mean, let's go back. What did Teddy Roosevelt do? He said, we got to preserve these lands because they're beautiful. And by the way, he said that after he shot all his elephants and tigers and tigers, lions and tigers and bears. Yeah, I mean, I, I, I hail from a museum, the American Museum of Natural History, where he's the patron saint of that museum. What happened was he realizes how important this land is and how beautiful it is. And he's the, he's the patron saint of the national park system. So, so that's the secular version of sacred, right? You don't say it's sacred, but we've all decided as a community that we care about these lands and you don't want to drill on it, you don't want to put housing. Was it Lyndon Johnson's wife, Lady Bird Johnson, who said, our freeways that were so carefully building after the Second World War, the Eisenhower Freeway Project, okay? Hi, you know, the interstate system is, this is our country, we want to keep it beautiful. So certain stretches over there are no billboards. Would, you know, would change your relationship to nature. So certain stretches of interstate are secularly sacred, if I can say that. So I remember visiting, visiting Australia and there's the famous rock out in the outback, the Uluru, Uluru. Please help me get my correct pronunciation of this. Uluru. And it's, it's, I'm told it's one coherent geologic rock. It's not just an assembly of rocks. And so I don't know enough about the geology of it, but I do know that the Australian aborigines, Uluru, and okay, iconic red rock. Look at that cool thing. Okay. So that is one sort of geologic thing. And, and climbers want to climb it. That's, it's miles in circumference, okay? So we visited it. I rented a bicycle with my wife and, and, and kids and we rode around it, okay? So now, that is sacred to the local indigenous peoples. So they don't want you to climb on it. Well, I'm a rock climber. You know, what do you care? I'm not going to ruin it. I'm not going to, they don't want you to climb on it. And I try to think to myself, is there a counterpart to this that would sort of wake up a westerner to say, I get it, right? Now suppose some people from, some natives from Alaska or from the, some tribes from Africa or some aborigines came up from these remote places of the world, walked up to the Vatican and said, we want to climb the walls of this Vatican just for sport. What would we say? We want to climb the walls of St. Paul's Cathedral in downtown London. What would you say no? Yeah, but are those comparable in these instructions? We, we want to repel down the tower of Big Ben. You're going to say no. Get the fuck out of you and say no. These are important structures to us. No, are you going to say are the equivalent? Well, we built those and the natives didn't build the rock. Right. Exactly. Okay. It depends on how important that detail is to you. All I'm saying is on the level of, we say, this is sacred, you say that is sacred. And now you're going to have different rules for who's climbing what? I, I think it'll for sure to take pause. Well, here's an argument and full and, and like supporting what you're saying. Look at what's going on with the Himalayas. I mean, it's the human shit that they had, they leave behind there. All the climbers. So disturbing. Yeah. The climbers. Yeah. It's horrible. It's really horrible. I mean, there's tons of it. Tons of human waste. Okay. So what you do there is, if it's still not a problem that people are climbing, it's that they're leaving waste. You don't stop the climbers. You tax them at some level so that now you have cleanup crews that come up after them. Yeah, but it's a problem. But there's solutions to credit. No, look, dude, do anything back. So you, you, you, you tax them, you make it worth it. All right. So you understand like they, what, what, here's what I'm saying. I'm saying, what, here's what I'm saying. What, here's what I'm saying. When they invented cars and cars were killing people in the street because people didn't know how to cross the street. They didn't know where to cross the street. People don't know how to stop the cars. They say, well, cars are actually a pretty useful thing. Do we ban cars? No, we make stoplights. Oh, people across there, well, we make crosswalks. Oh, let's put lanes so the cars don't hit each other and, and let's make airbags so that you don't fly through the windshield. All right. So there are ways around problems if you value the thing that it is that you want to do. So if people even crap up there, you make them bring it back or you develop a system that enables the stuff to come back no matter what. If you can't do that and you don't want it messed up, then cancel the whole operation. We didn't cancel cars. We got really innovative about how to keep them. I think there's a big difference between cars and human shit that's left in the saddle of the mountain. I think the real problem too is I think if you value mountain climbing and you want to keep doing it, then you solve the problem. This is what engineers do. That's all they do is what's a problem of solving it. They've been able to bring those bodies back because the physical limitations of the human body, it's barely, you barely have enough juice to climb. It's so thin, the air so thin, it's so dangerous. And the energy draw on you is so high. Leave those bodies there. So what? Is that the human shit that you're talking about? Or is that? No, there's no. No, there's no. You're talking about the fact that humans were there that we got, we're not very clean about our presence. That's what you're talking about, right? Well, we're just being human. We have to go and you got to go. You got to go. You got to go up there, you just open up the hatch and let a rip down the side of a mountain and the resulting... Do you know what in the space station they recycle your urine and your crap? Congratulations to them. Because that put engineers on the problem. When I mean my cyclic, they extract all the water from it. And then what's left is highly dried and mineral. Yeah, water is water. It's water molecule. That's the thing about water. By the way, by the way, every clasps and water. Do you see this? People's pee is in it. That's correct. You got a bottle of water here? Cave vampy. Okay. This has... Napoleon's pee in it. Yes. Yes, there are more molecules of water in this bottle. Then there are bottles of water, this volume of water in all the world's oceans. So in other words, if you drank this and peed it out, okay? You have enough molecules in your pee and in your sweat and in the moisture that you exhale. All that goes back into the environment, scattering into all sources of the world. And there's enough of those molecules to occupy every half liter of water that covers the surface of this earth. So that given enough time, you scoop a cup of water out of there. I don't even care if you filter it. The H2O is still there. That is water. That is passed through the kidneys of Abraham Lincoln. Genghis Khan. The heart of Ark. Socrates. Plato. No. Jesus? Can I get a bottle of Jesus? I'm trying to get my Bill and Ted's excellent venture list going here. Okay. You just ruined it. But yes, Jesus would be included in that. So would Socrates. Yes. So that is the... By the way, the same is true with breath of air. There are more molecules of air in every breath you take. And there are breaths of air in all the atmosphere of the earth. So when you exhale, there's enough of those molecules to scatter. And the air currents will do this, to scatter into every breath of air that is in hell. So when you take a breath of air, you have molecules of air that went through the lungs of Jesus. We're all connected. And there's no way around it. The water that we have is the water that we have. We drink it, we pee it, because the atmosphere comes down as rain. And the rain is an important difference is, most of the water on earth is salt water that you can't drink. There's a limited amount that's fresh water. How much of a... By the way, all the glaciers are fresh water. Because it's frozen rain. Right. Frozen rain. Here's something that no one talks about. When the glacier is melt, where does the water go? Where's it go? Where's it go? Just tell me, you know the answer. In the ocean? Back in the ocean. Okay. But this is now non-salty water going into the ocean. So you're mixing fresh water with brackish water. And they occupy different places in the vertical profile of the ocean. And because salt water is heavier than fresh water. Since fresh water occupies the top, it's not as salty as the water at the blow. There are circulations in the ocean. Not only up and down, you know, northern latitude, southern latitude, like the Gulf Stream. There's also circulation top to bottom. And the combinations of all these circulations create the stability of the ocean. If you disrupt that, oh my gosh. There are animal fishes that can't live anymore where they used to be because the salt level is different. And so some animals might go extinct. Some weather patterns will change because the ocean affects climate. So these are, this is why climate modeling is so critical yet so complicated. It's because there are a lot of variables that show up. Why can't we take the salt out of the water? You can, it just takes energy. You can do it. But why isn't that being done on the water scale? You have to ask. You, it was paying for the energy. Where you get the energy from. It's an energy thing. But I would think that would be very valuable. I mean, think about how many people buy it. It's not valuable enough. Yet that's the point. Well, is it that? It's just money. It's just money. Dude, it's just money. You can ask, what does it cost to ship a, a half-pine of water from Fiji? Okay, whatever it has is the square bottle that you buy in a Fiji water. Is it Fiji, right? Yeah. Fiji water. What does it cost to bottle that into Fiji, ship it here relative to desalinating the ocean? It's cheaper to ship. Like to Fiji. There'll be a day when that's not the case. And future wars are going to be fought over who has access to fresh water. And the value of water will go up. And by the way, the value of water in space is $10,000 a pound. So if you, if you lasso a comet and you say this is a lot of fresh water, uh, yeah, you could, I guess you can bring it back down to earth, but that's expensive. You're better off selling it to NASA for $9,000 a pound. Because it costs them $10,000 a pound to put water into orbit. So you better off keeping it up there and somehow another chance to find it? Yeah. So if you harness water in space, you better off trading in space with it, then bringing it back down to a planetary surface at the moment. What is the economic favor that? What is the desalination process? So it's, it's simple. You just evaporate the water. It's, it's basically a still. It's, it's, it's, it's a, it's a distillery, right? So here's, here is a pocket of water with that's highly salty and you just heat it. The H2O evaporates leaving sodium chloride behind. And at the end, you get this salt deposit at the bottom of your dish, at the bottom of your vessel. Oh, wait a minute. What happens to lakes that used to be there that salty lakes that used to be there that aren't? There's a salt deposit. That's the source of our modern day salt. This is what I tweeted the other day that all table salt is, is, um, all table salt is sea salt. It just came from long buried prehistoric evaporated seas. So salt mines and I was, I was told by some geologists. I had, I had had a narrow, narrow usage of the word mine. I think of a mine, I think of a hole in the ground, but mining operations include surface operations as well. So there are surface lakes that have evaporated and you get salt from that as well as the mines that you would dig down deep below. So that whole, all of that is a mining operation. My tweet only referenced the buried ones, but it's all, but it's all from evaporated waters. It's all from evaporated, it's all sea salt is the point. Now nuclear power plants rely on steam, right? Isn't that part where we clear our plan? Just to finish the point. So you evaporate the water and the salt left, maybe you want, what do you use that, make some sea salt out of it, table salt, and that evaporated water condenses out over here and that is distilled water. Right. Now you might want to mineralize it so it tastes good because distilled water doesn't taste good, plus it's not really healthy to drink it as you probably know. You drink distilled water, it goes into equilibrium with your minerals, sucking minerals out of you so it has the same minerality that your body does and then you pee it out and you'll systematically drain yourself of important electrolytes. So generally the water that you would say tastes good and you enjoy has some mineral bits, some kind of mineral minerals in it. Now nuclear power plants don't they, the process is using that nuclear energy to create steam to operate turbines and. Yeah, basically all of our electricity that comes from essentially, mostly electricity is coming from turbines that convert steam to electricity. So sorry, so you heat water, the water makes steam, the steam turns the turbine and the turning turbine generates the electricity. So so it's a matter of where do you get the energy to boil the water. That's what it comes out, is it coal, is it oil, is it is it nukes, is it wind, is it hydro, all of this, you get a hydro plant, oh by the way in a hydro plant they don't have to make steam because they have the water, the water pressure at the base of the dam moves through the turbines and turns the turbines and they make electricity. So you don't have to heat anything because they have the water pressure to do that anyway. That is also solar power by the way because the sun evaporated ocean water, the water lifts up, becomes a cloud, the cloud moves over ground over the land, the cloud rains into the lake that is above the dam. So the energy that got the water up there in the first place is all solar. So you should think of hydroelectric as solar as well as wind energy because wind is the uneven, unequal heating of air on earth surface and that creates air currents that's also solar power, it's all solar. Isn't it conceivable that you could come up with a combination of desalination and power plant where you're using the heat to combine, you know, to make the turbines move and then you steam it off and that's where you get the water from. That would be a good, that's an interesting idea and I don't know how much that's been thought about. What you're saying is I'm making steam anyway. So why don't I do it with salt water out and make that nice two for one kind of thing? Three for one. And you get salt out the other side. Get salt. Get salt. Get fresh water. Get fresh water and you generate electricity. Yeah. So do patent it. No. I'm it's free for anybody who wants to go take that run with it. I have high hopes for tidal energy because there's certain places on earth where tides are very powerful and they're very, and you just put some paddles in there and you sort of, and it works both ways when the water comes in and out. No, this is battery technology that's the reason why LA is completely dependent upon solar because it seems like this is the spot to do it. It never rains. I mean, if it rains here 50 days, it's crazy or any desert, right? And we're next door to the Mojave Desert, right? So one of the problems is, by the way, the deserts are generally localized to certain latitudes on earth. It's because of general circulation on earth. So the air pockets on earth, there's a lot going on. The air moves in a lot of ways. But there's an overriding circulation of air that has air sort of rising up at the equator. Imagine a cylindrical movement of air that girds the earth. So just above the equator, you have a cylinder rotating where you have air rising. And just below the equator, you have a cylinder rotating the opposite way so that air is still rising at the equator. So air rises at the equator. It's unstable. It makes clouds. The equator is the cloudiest place on earth, practically. One of the cloudiest places. Well how about the other side of those cylinders where the air descends? Okay? Okay. When you have descending air, you don't make clouds. Well how big is the cylinder? It's about 30 degrees of latitude wide. So your rainiest places on earth are at the equator. That's where you get the Amazon rainforest in the lake. And your driest places on earth are at 30 degrees north and 30 degrees south. Because these cylindrical movements of air have descending air there. So the Mahabhi Desert, the Sahara Desert, the Gobi Desert, they're all around 30 degrees north latitude. So we live on the surface of the earth where there are forces operating that are so much bigger than us that we don't even think about it. Why is an India would be a desert? Because it's right in that zone where it's not for the seasonal monsoons. It doesn't rain much in India except when it's monsoon season. So the monsoon is sort of the exception to what would otherwise happen there. And that's why everyone loves the monsoon. They hate it but they love it. It cools the weather, they get sources of water. There it is. So they ask you the question again. Oh, does it not answer the story? Oh, so battery technology, like why is an LA completely solar? It should be. It's not. At some of it is cost. LA is so car heavy. And plus, there's a Lamborghini passing me at 20 miles an hour on the 405. This is the land of wasted horsepower. So any place that has a lot of sunlight should be thriving on solar panels and you guys aren't. I looked around very few homes have solar panels and I don't fully understand that. If you did that then you'd run off your own power. You can do this. You can do the operation. Make it very difficult by the way. And so, so, um, yeah, I mean the price might have to come down a little further. You don't really see the full price of oil. It's, it's subsidizing ways that are not obvious to us. You know, we built the roads without taxes so that car companies could sell you a car that you drove on the road that they, that was built for them. If they had to build all their own roads, the price of gas to go in the car would have been much higher. If the car company's not up to it. What I'm saying is I make a product and I want you to use it but there's no roads. Oh, I convinced you to build the roads so you can buy my car and drive on that road. That's a weird way of looking at it. But it's a way, it's full cost accounting. It's full cost accounting. What is the cost of coal? It's how many people died of lung disease of pneumoneral tromicroscopic silo covalent canocaniosis. Okay. That's the longest word in the in the random house dictionary. That's basically black lung. Yes, basically black lung. But you can break it up. The new mono ultramyroscopic silo covalent with the silo kits in the canocaniosis. So there's all medical bits, assemble together to make that word. So what is the cost to their health, their death, their, the air quality, asthma, the total cost of oil is not what you pay at the gas tank. It's other things that we shell out that are not realized in the actual cost of that source of energy. If you full cost accounted, what all this really costs, then the solar option would look way better than it does relative to it. That's all I'm telling you. But when you're talking about cars and car manufacturers having to pay for roads, isn't that like, no, they didn't pay for roads. Isn't that like restaurants having to pay for toilet paper? No, restaurants going, restaurants have to pay for land that you would park your car on to go into the restaurant. Not a New York City, but in places where everybody has cars, if you don't have valet parking, my restaurant will not occupy the entire plot of land I just bought. It's going to be some, it's going to be a fourth of that land and all the rest are going to be parking spots. I have absorbed the cost of your parking, your car, in me, in my acquisition of that, of that real estate, for example. To make it convenient so people could use your facility. Correct. But I bore that cost as, as restaurant tour. Right. Or maybe I'm renting, of course, but that's that's. How does that relate to someone, the car manufacturers being forced to pay for the roads, or that they should be? That would have been interesting, had they, because then it would have changed the pricing of everything. But why would they be? Are you going to make a car and no one has a road to drive it on? That's your responsibility. It's your responsibility. Then you don't have a business. But don't you want a car? Yes. So we all agree. Cars are good. They move fast. They get you where you want to go. Right. So how do we as a society make it easier for people to get where they want to go? Well, we all chip in and we make roads. It's not entirely to be. Before they were cars, nobody is thinking, you know, I want to go to Chicago tomorrow and I'll be back on Thursday. No one is even having that thought. Before there were email, no one was thinking, I'll just send you an email. Right. These are not thoughts. So I'm just talking about all the forces that add to a line to make it actually work. Okay. So now what's holding back electric cars? Well, I might not be able to charge it. It takes a little too long to charge compared to my other vehicle. Are there enough chargers along the way? Well, these were questions that were asked when people got cars. If I have cars and it takes gas, is there a gas station? Oh, standard oil says we'll put a gas station there. Right. Because you're buying cars. And so it's a whole family of businesses coming together. And you're paying for a big part of that. It's not just the car you paid for the roads. So I'm saying, I'm not complaining about it. I'm just describing it as a reality. I get it. I just didn't understand the comparison to car manufacturers paying for the day. If I make a car and I want you to buy my car, I need a road. So I'm going to build the road. Oh, wait a minute. I convinced you to build the road. That's even better. Oh my gosh. I made it a national priority. Oh, it's a security problem. We need a military design interstate system. That's what the interstate is. That's why it goes through mountains instead of over them. That's why there are long stretches of straightaway. So you can land an airplane on it. That's why they're built above the road. That's why the surface roads are not the same thing as highways. Because the highways are not on the surface. Why? Because they're built up. Why? Because tanks can drive on them without decomposing the road. What specs did we put this to? To the Autobahn. The Germans invented the modern highway system. They invented the clover leaf. They invented the off ramps. They invented all of that. And their armies could move on their roads like it was nobody's business. And Eisenhower said, hey, we'll get me some of that. That's probably not how he said it. I'm guessing. But he comes all convinces us all that we need to build an Internet. I got nothing against the interstate system. I'm just giving you the foundational facts for it. And by the way, interstate system costs as much as going to the moon. About $100 billion in total cost. It seems like a bargain compared to how many people use it versus how many people want the moon. It grows the economy. There has a lot of, a lot of, but basically it was sold as a security need. Because if you're at war, you need to move material and personnel. And you might have to land an airplane in an emergency way. And so all freeways do this. If you're going to crash a plane, do it on a freeway. Happens. Yeah. But do it because you might land safely. And if you don't land safely, the road comes to you to get to the hospital. Don't crash in a forest. We can't get to you. We can't get emergency vehicles. Good call. Yeah. You know, if you've seen this new Porsche has a new electric vehicle that's about to release. I haven't seen a evolutionary groundbreaking technology that allows you to charge much faster. You could charge up to 80% in 20 minutes. Because it's double the, well, pull up the information. Was it wattage or amperage? Well, well, well, just a couple of things. A bunch of different batteries in the amount. You can't cheat physics. So, yes, some batteries charge faster than others. But what really drives the charging speed of battery is the voltage over which you charge the battery. And it goes as the square of the voltage. So supercharged. So, if you charge an electric car in your 120 volt home electricity, it could take 30 hours. If you go to 240 volts, okay, it'll take, you know, 10 hours. If you go to 384 volts, you keep going up. That drops precipitously. And you can get a voltage where the thing will charge in a few, a couple hours. Yeah, we have a supercharger here. What do you do? Yeah, we have some set up here for my Tesla. So, there you go. Which Tesla you have? The S. Yeah, cool. So, you charge it at most 90 minutes. I don't think they call it that anymore. I think they don't, they don't have that. The superchargers? No, the Tesla. I think they call it a, they have like an S-raven. They have, they don't think they call the S anymore. No, it's not the P100D. That's the, they don't call that anymore. Battery capacity, okay. Now they, I think they have it based on whether it's a single engine or double engine. They've simplified things. They've got to removed all the labels to make it a little slicker, slicker. So, in the Porsche, is it just the, they're selling a higher voltage charger to you? Trying to find that info. Or is the battery so completely different? Google, 10 interesting things about the new Porsche Taycan. How do you say it? Taycan? That's the article I was reading today. So, that's cool. So, my concern is batteries are still kind of 19th century technology. Yeah. So, invented the battery? Volta. Alexander Volta. Oh, that makes sense. Yeah, it's cool. Volta. Volta. Volta comes from him. Volta. Yeah, yeah. All these guys got, you know, they got famous so, Tesla. We got a car named after him. The guy had a, no, as a car. There's actually a unit of electromagnetism named after Nicola Tesla. Yeah. It's a, Webber's per square meter, I think. So, it's like the density of magnetic field strength within a certain area through a surface. So, battery is charged by an inductive plate. The conventional charge is at the Porsche claims that the Porsche Turbo Charging System charges at 350,000 watts, kilowatts, 15 minutes. 80% in just 15 minutes. Oh, that's cool. It's not clear how Porsche will prevent battery overheating. They won't. Yeah. We have a good luck, bitch. So, it could be vaporware. But we'll see. But they've already been driving it. But it's game on. That's what that means. Yes. It's game on. Whether it works or not, it's like, people, Tesla's on notice. Everybody's on notice. Yeah. Oh my gosh. I'm going to lose market share because people want to buy an electric car. And so, you can... They want something that's going to charge fast. And that's the number one complaint that most people have over electric cars. Or you find a way to, okay, so that's one way. But in other ways, you find a way to swap batteries. As quickly as it... In less time than it takes to fill a tank. Yeah. You know, how much time do you stand there with your hand on the nozzle waiting for the gas to go in? Right. So, they would have to have a mountain of batteries sitting there waiting for people to just come in and take a wall. Is that any worse than a mountain that... Then a... Then a... Sunk and reservoir tank of gas. There's no different. What? Why is that any different? Probably larger volume, right? Possibly, but... So, what? If it's economic, you just do it. Right. And if the battery is all at the bottom of the car, and it's going NASCAR, you run in, pop it up. Mm-hmm. Take out the battery, put it next one, you're off. Do you think that's the future? Why not? It's better than charging the battery. You don't have a car, do you? No, I do have cars. No, I didn't use to. I didn't use to. It's expensive as hell to garage it in New York. I just went up, the price just went up. The big... The big price point of that was, when did the average cost to garage a car for a month in New York's... In Manhattan, equal the average cost of a two-bedroom home in the United States. And we've passed that cost of rent. Yes, the average... So, it cost more to... It was like 600 dollars a month or something. To a rent a parking spot? To rent a parking spot, right? One spot. One spot a month. A standard of a month. And you can rent the home in many places, you know, in the suburbs, somewhere for 600 dollars. Look how car you drive. So, I now have a Tesla. Yeah, so I... I... I ponied up... They're expensive, by the way. So, yeah, so I have the X. So that's my utility vehicle. X is the SUV. A very high acceleration, as you know. And... But, yeah, there's no maintenance on it, right? There's no oil chains. There's no... You know, the only moving part is the... What you turn in the wheels with, right? There's no pistons. Nothing. So, you know, cars really should have been this 100 years ago. And then we would have had 100 years of clever engineering to protect that. Have you ever seen a documentary who killed the electric car? No, I haven't, but I know about it. And I know some of the background story behind it. And the electric car was one of the first... Because electricity was all the rage 100 years ago. Let's electrify the cities this day. There's Edison. There's... TAS, everybody wants to do everything electric. And the car had just come out. Let's do it electric. So this was not a new concept. And it's unfortunate that more sort of innovative thinkers hadn't been brought to TASK on how to perfect the electric car. Speaking of Tesla and electricity, what did you think about Tesla's initial idea that Westinghouse shot down to sort of broadcast electricity? So the people could just pull it out of the air. Yeah, so the people in the Nikola Tesla fan club somehow feel that he got wronged in his life, okay? And surely some of that is true with regard to his business, Akimin and patents, and who owns the patent? And does he have good business sense? Is he as savvy or as sneaky, whatever other words you might apply to Edison? All right, so I get that. But his contributions to electromagnetism are real and recognized in the world of physics. Like I said, there's a unit of electromagnetism named after him. So don't come crying to me, say he was not recognized by my people, okay? He's recognized. He had some ideas that were a little out there and out there on a level where it almost certainly would have not worked. And here's why, okay? Electromagnetic energy is communicating between us. I see you, that's because visible light is reflecting off of your scalp, okay? To me. It's reflecting off of my nose back to you. You can ask how much energy is in that? Well, not much. It's not much energy in visible light photons. If you stayed there long enough, you might feel a little warmth from it. But no, you're not going to drive a car with that energy. You're not going to run a motor with it, okay? Well, what good is it? Oh, you know what we found? We can use electromagnetic radio waves, which are the lowest form of electromagnetic energy, lowest energy level of all of our light. We can use radio waves not to transmit energy. That's not the point of it. The point is to transmit information. And information became what characterized the modern era. And that's why in the 1950s and 60s, when everyone is imagining flying cars and motorized sidewalks, everything is running on energy because they're thinking energy is going to be free in the future. But what they didn't figure was that information would be free or easy to transmit and to generate and to store and to delete. And whereas the energy that would take to move things and to drive things, that would be a problem. No one saw that coming. Nobody saw that coming. So, as your photons get higher and higher energy, yes, you can start doing things with them. You had x-rays and gamma rays. But that's not what Tesla was referring to. He was talking about moving radio waves through the space that would charge things up. You can't pack sufficient energy in your radio wave to do anything we need to do mechanically. Currently. Well, back then would it be sufficient? There might have been something you could have done with your radio waves because the needs were... No, but that... No, no. I take that back. That was the height of the industrial revolution. That was the age of the machine. The age of the giant turbines. Radio energy is not touching that. Right, but wasn't it possible that he was considering it for things like radios or light bulbs or household items? Would it be possible to use that power for that? So now what... So what happens? So the radio waves... If you had enough power in radio waves to generate a light bulb, to power a light bulb, well, through the air, are you standing in the way of this? This energy has pathways. We now send energy through wires. Because you're not standing in the way of the wire. The wire is buried. The wire has insulation. And the wire is on a high suspension. You want to move it through the air and you want to walk around like... No, that's not how that works. But what I've heard... If you're moving enough energy through the air to power something that itself could kill you, the energy powering through the... Moving through the air could kill you. Unless you bring a little bit amount and then you store it and then use it later. You could do it that way. Sure. Sort of a battery and stuff. Yeah, you need a storage system. But you would still probably have some sort of residual effect of having this stuff broadcast through the air. And who knows what it would do to human health? If you needed that much energy right now, the energy to transmit information is so low that it... No, it has no effect on your health. That's why I can pull out my cell phone. I'm in a brick... This is fake brick, that's fake brick. I'm in a... No, it's a real brick. No, it's not. Yes, it is. Go touch it. I don't believe you. Go ahead. Those are real bricks. Go touch the bricks, man. Jesus Christ, you think we have fake bricks? Who do you think we are? Okay. Oh, you got it. Thought I was a liar. How weird. Now, let me be honest. It's a veneer. A brick veneer. Okay, so that's from the real building. It's not structural brick. It would slice the end of bricks and then they mortar it in and everything. You got real brick and I could look for it. Okay, so we're both right. That's real brick. But it's not structural. It's not structural. So here I am, I'm real fake. So we're inside it. I can pull out my cell phone and have a phone call. Yes. These are microwaves of a frequency that can penetrate walls, send information to my cell phone, and I can communicate using information and not have that energy kill me. But it's not enough to power the actual device. It is not enough to power the device. Correct. So Tesla, everyone is thinking he's got the solution to the future transmission of energy. No, he doesn't. Well, I don't think anyone's saying that. He did, and his fans do. But back then there were no computers. Back then there were no televisions. But we did have machines. It was the era of the big machine. Right. But I don't think he was insinuating that you could use the power. I don't know what he wanted to power with it. I don't know what he would have powered with it. If not light bulbs and other things. You know, one thing you brought up that's really interesting. You talked about light reflecting off of things. Are you aware that BMW painted one of their cars Vanta Black? I saw. This is Jet Black. Yes. I saw it recently. I saw it recently. Yes. No light can bounce off of it. Right. And you can't drive it. Because people won't be able to see it at night. You're literally saying like this is just a theoretical, I mean, just like. What you want to do, you could line it with the light trim. Pull it to the image of it. No, I see. I saw one in a parking lot. It's very bad at. You actually saw one in real life. That's not what I saw. I saw a sports car version. I saw Vanta Black car. They have them. I saw a sports car. That was not this. The car you have up there. I don't know what that is. What I saw. That's the BMW that they painted Vanta Black. Okay. Well, then the Vanta Black is available on their badass load of the ground sports car. And so what? No, it's not available commercially. What do you want me to say? No, I'm not saying that for BMW. It's not something they're offering. I'm an LA. You have all your cars here. Everything's showcased here. I didn't see it in New York. I saw it here in LA. Well, I'm sure. Maybe it wasn't a BMW. Maybe somebody else did. No. I'm just saying BMW, if someone did it, BMW didn't make it themselves. Okay. Someone must have done it. I mean, you can do it. It's a real thing. Vanta Black is a real car. So one of the principles of stealth is that if you send a signal to it, it never comes back to you. So you have no sort of radar measure of its existence. I saw it pop. Correct. But there are two ways you can do that. One of them is you cannot reflect back. Okay. But by absorbing it. Right. Okay. So a jet matte black will absorb it and not reflect it back. But if there's enough energy coming at it, it will heat up. You can't get something for nothing here. It will heat up the skin of that and it could be bad for the occupants. That's what they said about the article about Vanta Black. Yeah. If you put that in the desert, forget it. Well, they were saying even in Los Angeles. They were so hot. Exactly. So another way to do it is the signal comes to me and I reflect it in a direction that is not back to you. So the B2 bomber is not only non-reflective back to you. It takes the signal and reflects it and double bounces it so that all your energy gets sent in other directions and not back to you. So it doesn't then keep the energy that was sent to it. So that's another way to do it. There's another stuff which was featured in one of the recent, not recent four years ago, James Bond movies, where light that comes at it, the light that's behind it, goes around it coherently and comes back to you. And it's not there. You are seeing what's behind it. But the path of that light went around the vessel and continued on its way to you. So you think you're just seeing the grass in the tree, but there's a car sitting right there. You didn't know about this technology. No. Right now it exists only for a look up a stealth light ray stealth. And so the material has to be able to know what is behind it. Do you think small objects only? No, no, no. Only works in one sight line. Whereas if you needed functional stealth, everybody looking at it should every path, every sight line to it, should be able to see what's behind it on the other side of that sight line. So the way it reflects things. Yeah, it carries the light beam around it and sends it out the other side. Do you have a look and find it? Yeah. Yeah, what you have is there's like a solid block and a person is looking at it and you see their eye out the other side. It's really freaky. It's a future of stealth. What are your thoughts on digital privacy? What do you mean? Well like phones. Like phones. Like you ever talk to someone about something and then you see it on your Google feed. Do you see ads? Yeah, so we don't, I mean I haven't researched this but my wife tells me we were once gifted one of these, you know, what do you call those things that you talk to? Oh, Alexa. Yeah, well wherever the Google one is, is that Alexa? Who's at home, Google at home? No, Alexa is Amazon. So it's Google at home and she says, don't turn that on. I said, why not? Because they'll be listening. And I didn't believe it first and then I started hearing stories. And so I don't have one but it's not because I know that it's listening or not listening. Well, it is, substantiated because being actually said, they've apologized for actual human contractors listening in to conversations that people have had having sex, having arguments, like it's real. Yeah, that seems like it should be a problem. So what's your question to me? What am I all for it or am I all for it? What's your question? No, my question is one of the things that you're getting out of their ability to scan things is they're tailoring things to your liking. Like, you know how your phone tells you it's 22 minutes until you get home? I get it. And you're like, bitch, how do you know where I live? Exactly. I didn't tell you where I live. I got, here it is. And I'm just old fashioned about this. Okay. I'm get off my lawn about this. Yeah. I'm the old man in the rocking chair on the porch saying, sonny, get off my lawn. But you're also a scientist. Okay. But I don't want to, okay, I wear multiple hats. I'm also a dad, I'm also a husband. I got all these hats for all those things. In this particular case, I'm old man. And my old man's sensibility is, if you track what I shop at a store, what I buy at a store, and then send me coupons based on what you think I'm going to buy next, based on what I've bought before, which is kind of the same thing you're describing. You have denied me the chance of stumbling upon something that I never thought of buying. And that takes away my freedoms and I don't want that. How have they denied you the chance of stumbling upon something different? It's not diabolical. It's just in the casual flow of life. I'll give an example. I walk into a wine shop. Can I help you? And I say, if you help me find what I'm looking for, it's a guarantee that I will never find what I'm not looking for. And I'll end up spending less money in your wine shop. That's a weird way of looking at that. It's the art of browsing. Dude, you're old enough to remember when I got to look up this word in a dictionary, and you get through six other words, oh, I never knew that word. Let me read that. You learn other words on root to the word you're targeting. I understand. Okay. So that's how I feel. And that's how I think about my interaction with this world. I'd like the randomness. The randomness of it enriches my life. And if you're going to advertise to me because you think you know who I am, maybe you do, but I'll ultimately end up spending less money. Because it's the diversity of how I think, and what I buy, and what I think of buying, and how I buy it, and how much money I spend, that is the richness of the life I lead. You're trying to channel me into some product, something that fulfills a, what do you call it when they have the study, whether you're going to buy something or not? The survey? No, no. The table of people, do you like this product or not? Focus group. Am I just a focus group to you? If I am, you don't know me. And I want to experience this world by stepping where I've never stepped before, and buying something I've never thought of buying. And if you know my previous habits, you're assuming I'm going to stay that way for the rest of my life, and maybe most people do, and maybe I might do that, but if I do it because I chose to, not because you have decided that that's how I should be. Well, don't you think they're just screaming at you? I'm sorry. No, you're getting a little excited. Sorry. Don't you think they're just doing that because they think it would be effective to advertise in that way? So if you go Googling new Nike's, and then as you're looking at something and the Google ad pops up, and it's for new Nike's, they said, hey, nail. I know you were looking at these bad boys. We saw you. We saw you. Maybe I just need a little nudge. I mean, it's not, I don't think this is that diabolical. I'm the old man on the porch. I'm saying the next generation might feel completely different. They might say, I love it. They know exactly what I want. You heard about the case where they were, I read this, I haven't re-verified it, but it's completely plausible. It was a teenage girl who was Googling pregnancy tests because maybe she got pregnant, okay? And the fact that she had searched pregnancy tests, she got coupons in the mail for baby products. And a parent said, what is this? She got outed. That's a little weird. Yeah, but it's the kind of thing that can happen. That seems intrusive, certainly. Oh, that's intrusive only because it's pregnancy. It's intrusive. No, it's intrusive. No, because it's... It's intrusive because you want to buy Nike's? Because you're sending you physical things. That's not just something that appears on your Google feed that you can click a glance over. What's the difference between sending you mail to your mailbox and filling your advertising space in front of your face with product? From one other people can see it... I walk by your computer, I can see it. Don't look. I guess I'm arguing in principle rather than in detail here. Okay, well let me take the counterpoint. On the positive side, what they're doing in terms of... It's particularly Google. In terms of your driving. And in terms of using of Google Maps. And documenting the history of all these people driving and especially with things like Ways, which they acquired, is they've developed a much more efficient product than Apple. Which what Apple does, Apple Maps, they shred everything you do. Yes, they do. All where you've been and where you're going? That's correct. But Apple Maps sucks. Because they don't have enough data. They don't have nearly the amount of data. Google has billions. What is Google giving you that Apple Maps isn't? They're telling you you're 22 minutes from home. Time for you to drive home. Is it... Are you valuing that? No, I'm not. No, I'm not. Okay, but wait, hold on. Their program's far better. I can ask it how long it'll take me to go somewhere. Rather than knowing what my daytime schedule looks like and then coming in, like you said, how do you know, bitch? You know, I have that same reaction as you did. And I said, I wonder what's causing this. It's a little creepy. And again, I'm the old man syndrome. So, a 10-year-old kid that's only ever known this and becomes 15 and 20, that is life to them. Right? Why would they even... Maybe they're not going to complain about it. But I'm the old man on the porch. But do you think it's off my lawn? This sort of intrusiveness or at the very least this connection that you have to these devices and that they have to your patterns and your information seems inevitable. That doesn't mean I have to welcome it with open arms. But I agree it's inevitable. I agree. Plus, we have security cameras everywhere. Everybody knows where you are. If the KGB had access to people the way we, in the, during the Cold War, the way modern the United States has access to us, we would say, oh my gosh, you have taken away your country's freedoms. Where are the free leaders of the free world? And you guys have imprisoned your entire population. Oh my gosh. The KGB would give their right arm to have the monitoring devices that are actively in place here in the United States today. We know where you are. We know how long you stayed there. We have records of it. We know what street you were walking on. We don't necessarily monitor it, but we can dig it up if we have to. And with facial recognition, I can track you wherever you are. I feel like there's a facial recognition. I use it now. It doesn't care if I'm wearing, if I'm wearing a hat or sunglasses. It still knows who the hell I am. Yeah. It relies on so many points today. Yeah, so many points of cheekbones and nose eye separations and everything. I think. Ratio's of numbers are highly powerful probes of the structure in the form of things. So you know, fibonacci sequence, right? That could be in there. If you have a fibonacci head. It doesn't everybody's face. No, fibonacci is, I think, is a little overplayed. Fibonacci is a little overplayed. Especially once you get a nose job. So if you can find it in nature and say, oh, it's in this beautiful, but you've overlooked all the places where it doesn't show up in nature. Right. It appears so many times. It doesn't appear in more places than it does appear. Right, but in a lot of living things. No, yeah, living things. Pine cones, pineapples, there's a lot of sunflower seeds. It's very, or sunflower seeds. Flowers. Yeah, really weird, isn't it? Yeah. I mean, it's this random, I mean, not random, but this very thing. Well, if the next thing you do depends on the previous two things you did, you get the fibonacci series. I mean, that's often the case with, say, you know, think of things in your life you do where the third thing you do depends on you having done the previous two things in this exactly the same way. That's not everything in your life, but you can surely find some things to do that. I think it was Camden, New Jersey, where they had such a crisis. Well, that was so random. No, it's not. You can talk about surveillance. Yeah. Camden, New Jersey had such a crisis of funding that I think there was a brief period of time, at least I don't know if it's changed, where they literally didn't have a police force. And one of their solutions was to put surveillance cameras everywhere. And the idea was to sort of try to capture all the shit that was going down. Here it is. The surveillance city of Camden, New Jersey, a community... Okay, that's six years ago. ...at crime and the intrusive tools they're using in hopes of stopping it. Right. Yeah, this was, I mean, I don't remember anything. Well, this is classic after this happening. It's, let me take away your freedoms for your own safety. Yeah. This is a well-known Benjamin Franklin wrote about it. What's his famous Benjamin Franklin quote about security and freedom? Yeah, he who abandons freedom for security serves neither. Or is getting neither or something. Yeah. Yeah. So this is not it yet. But they that can give up essential liberty to attain a little temporary safety. Deserve neither liberty nor safety. Those who sacrifice liberty for safety, for security deserve neither. He who would trade liberty for some temporary security deserves neither liberty. He's got all comments. Yeah, man. He's gonna cover that bitch. All permutations on that one. This is what I mean. I don't want to leave any room for misquoting. He understood that. So your security, you give up some security for privacy, I think. Yes. And I don't know if it's a well-known place where that should be drawn. And you can actually get an entire generation born into a state where they think that's normal. We all now think it's normal. You have to show ID to walk into an office building. Right. Oh my gosh. What would that look like during the Cold War? You have to show you, in the United States, you have to show your papers just to walk into a building. So they're also changing the ID system where if you don't want to travel with a passport, you're gonna have to have a new federal ID. Before it had been through that, a federal driver's license, federally endorsed driver's license. I just went through that last week. Yeah. Right. So when did that go into play? When is that going to play? It's for everybody like next year or something. It's very soon. If you want to travel in a particular way, if you don't drive, it doesn't matter. Fly. Right. We want to fly. Correct. It's a passport wherever I go. So it's not really a problem for me. Oh you can't go passport everywhere you go if you want to just jet out of the country. Is this a space? What a house your brain wired? What? Thank you. You want to escape? No, if I had four passports then you'd say, do I want to leave the country. Yeah. Or whoever. Anybody in a espionage movie? There's somebody who has five passports. And with wads of cash of every currency. So I think I worry that we're sliding towards a state of total monitoring on the premise that we're all better off for it. Right. And it's like the frog in the heated water. We don't feel it day by day, but it's happening. We all agree that we can be hand padded down just to get on an airplane. We've all accepted that because of a handful of people. A handful of people historically, historically, historically, not even a handful in this moment. Just historically, and full of people, we all say, yes, take my luggage, X-ray my luggage, take away my liquids, pat me down, and I'm okay with that. Well, that's a transition. And I'm okay with security cameras in the street. It was okay in banks. We understood that. But now, when I exit the bank and I'm in the street, when I'm walking in the park. So I don't know, I don't know the future of that. I really don't know. I saw the movie 1984 recently. Not a very good movie. The book is better than the movie, and I hate to be one of the people who say that. But I was reminded how you can create an entire state where everyone is kept in line because somebody is telling you we are fighting this battle out on the front lines. I've forgotten this from the book. They're fighting a war on the front lines. You never see the war. You never hear about the war. You know anything about the war. Other than it exists. And you have to do things a certain way in country so that your country can protect itself from these evil people that want to take over and destroy your way of life. So everybody's under control. It's a big brother. Well what they didn't anticipate though was these social media companies would be the guards or the gatekeepers of your privacy. Because that's what's interesting. Because you voluntarily give them all your information. Yeah, it's not governments. It's Twitter and Facebook and Google and all the stuff that we use on a daily basis that has access to everything that you do. That's almost inconceivable to someone outside of this generation. That there would be a company that would provide a service. And through that service you would give up all notions of privacy. All privacy. Yeah, because literally you have a microphone that's listening everywhere you go. You have a bug that you can't run with you. I mean I don't remember what you've been pin bugged. You've really been pinned with a lapel. You will get ads for things you talk about. I mean that has been proven. So what is that? These passive listening devices that are only picking up key words. It's no big deal. It's just key words. It's the frog in the water. That's what I'm telling you. So I don't know where it's going to go. Like I said, I'm a little old-folk, old-folky about that. But I think we'll resolve it. Do you think this should be regulation? Generally if you have something good and it gets abused, you're regulated. That's the whole point of right. We're here alive today because of regulation. Because they're nefarious people who in control of powerful forces operating on society would gain at the expense of everyone else and would not be good for the progress of civilization. So you regulate. Okay. Airlines are regulated so that you don't die. All right. We have the safest record now ever for commercial airlines, American carriers, the safest ever. Look at not only how many people have not died relative to when we grew up. We grew up with at least one of two planes crashed each year. You'd lose between one of three hundred people every year. That was like the baseline number. That number is near zero now. And way more planes are taking off in landing than in any time when we were kids. So it's a double progress point for not only the transportation safety administration but engineering, technology and everything we care about. We want to fly. So you regulate. You make sure these are inspected this often. You don't. The pilots don't fly more than this many hours. This gets oil. This gets replaced. It's one of the triumphs of modern engineering, aerodynamics. Aerospace engineering as a branch of what we do as civilization is one of the greatest achievements there ever was. Agreed. Jamie, did you find that stealth stuff? I found there are cars that have like velvet. This would be a car. This would be a laboratory laboratory. You can't find anything. Oh, okay. But laboratory stealth light. Something. Try that. I found the clokes that people wear that sort of seems like video. Yeah, yeah, that seems like fuckery. Yeah, there's a lot of what. But in Harry Potter, the clokes that they wear, the invisibility cloak, that would be this principal. Yeah. If it existed with that. There's a bunch of videos of that, but it seems like they're just using after effects like Adobe or something like that to. To have fuck with the video rather than create an actual product that because there was a woman in an office that had a blanket. And she held up the blanket and you could only see the whole office. You wouldn't see the blanket at all. You'd see what's behind her. Behind her. And she lowered the blanket. You could see her. And then from the blanket down. So why isn't that just a green screen of the background image? Yeah, I think that's what it was. I think she was holding up a green blanket. I don't know how to guess. This might be it. It's dark matter. No, no, no, no, no, no, sorry, sorry, no, no, there's nothing to do with that. Okay. That's the map of dark matter in the universe. I've tried to give that a shot. No, we don't know what it is. So don't worry about it if you don't understand it. Yeah, but it's too goddamn confusing for me. No, it's not confusing at all. It's not, it's something out there that has 85% of the gravity of the universe. And we don't know what the hell it is. That's not confusing. It's not confusing. It's, it's, it's, if you don't know what that is, it's confusing by nature. Okay, I, I have more nuanced definition of confusing. Confusing is I am confused. I don't know how to think dark matter is. I don't even know what to think. I need something in my head to be confused. Right? Dark matter has, there's no, we don't know what the hell is. Do you anticipate a solution to that or some sort of a, sure, I want my eyes in and why I hope that might have been, yeah, might have been, yeah, it's not the GDT. That would be the goddamn, it's the TMT 30 meter telescope. So, yeah, solutions to, you don't know part of the, what it is to explore is not knowing what it is that you will find. And all these telescopes, the launched ones as well as the ground based ones, we have an a foresight where mature enough as a field to know that even though it's designed to look for certain things that were part of the program that you set up for it, you want to have a serendipity mode for it. You want to be able to say, let's point it in some random direction and see what shows up. Without that, you could miss something in plain sight. If you're only looking for one thing that you think is there, extrapolate it from what you knew before. And the way I think of it is, you know, there's the old saying as the area of our knowledge grows, so too does the perimeter of our ignorance. So, as that area goes, there are more places to look over the fence and stare into the abyss of ignorance that awaits you. So, dark matter is sitting on the other side of the fence. The way I've heard it describe is the bonfire of our knowledge grows brighter. The area of our ignorance is illuminated. Okay, I had to think about that. That's similar to what I said. If the bonfire is your knowledge that's lighting the way, you go see more stuff you've never noticed before. It's the same principle. That's a giant one though, man, 85%. It's 85% of gravity. So, yeah, and he adds that to the dark energy. We don't know what that is either. Dark matter, dark energy comprise 95% of everything that's driving the universe. So, everything we know and love, the chemistry, the physics, the biology, life, planets, stars, is 5% of the universe. So, people, theologians and folks say, well, maybe God is in the other 95%. Maybe. Okay, yeah. Maybe God's dark matter. Wouldn't that be crazy? Well, people say that. Surprise. Yeah. But I don't know why dark matter would care about whether, yeah. Or they're not chicks drive cars. Yeah, depending on which religion you're in, right? Yeah, all the religions got there. What are you wearing? Don't you know I'm God? What is the amount? I'm dark matter. Yeah. Um, we... Oh, by the way, just to, um, in letters from an astrophysics physicist, which isn't out yet, but again, I don't know how to hell you got the book. But it's, there's an entire chapter where I am conversing with people who are strongly religious. There's a conversation I have in there with orthodox Jewish person, a Muslim, multiple fundamentalist Christians. And we're talking about the age of the earth and why and why do we think one way or another? And so that's, there's a lot of intimate stuff in there that I generally don't go public with. But I would, did it one on one with those who had written to me about these challenges they were facing in life. And they wanted to know what an astrophysicist had to say about it. What's the youngest version of how old a religious person thinks the earth is? What's the, how, what's the... Six thousand years. Six thousand years. That's a question. Well, of all... And not all Christians, by the way. No, no, of all religions. I don't know the age... Scientologists like a month old. I don't know enough about how old all the religions think the universe is. The youngest you're going to get, the youngest universe you're going to get from a devout Christian in six thousand years. The oldest is around ten thousand. And... But it's far and away from billions. And the Mormons are a unique one because they think you get your own planet when you die. Yeah, and what's funny. Are you torn on that? What's... I want my own planet. Nobody told me that. It's odd how one religious group would comment on how preposterous another religious group's comments are. I love that. You know, I was once, I don't know if you know this, I was once quoted. I think the Scientology documentary came out on HBO and everybody was talking about it. It was clean. I think that was it. And there was a lot of chat about it for a couple of weeks. And one of the news outlets, I forgot who, called me up and said, do I think Scientology should be a religion? Classified as a religion, as an authentic religion. And you can just say, well, why are they calling me? Well, because in Scientology, they're aliens. And if they're space beings that come... You're not supposed to give up this information. Oh, sorry. No. So that's how I got brought into this conversation. Ah. Because of the sectors of Scientology that involve space beings. Okay. All right. So my answer was, we live in a country that protects the free expression. Of faith-based systems. Provided they don't subtract from the rights of others. So I will not sit here and judge whether fate ends from space, Exume souls from volcanoes, at least a third of what I just said is accurate. It's from Scientology. Or whether a man born of a woman is the son of God who died and rose from the dead. I'm not going to compare those and judge whether one of them is more authentic than another. When they're both founded on belief systems. And so in this country, belief systems are protected. And we've all bought into that. And so, you know what the headline was? Tyson defense, some knowledge. Of course. That's how you get clicks. That's what is the clickbait of my comment there. It is why I get clicks. You got to distort a little bit. There are some rational people who in the comment thread said, that's not what he said. Of course. Yeah. But isn't it more interesting when they do do that and then inside the actual article itself, they give your full quote so people can see the deception. The real confusing thing is when they take a chunk of your quote and they can take it out of context. So you know what I do? You're going to jail for that by the way. Well, so that's interesting. So for me, I'm an observer of that, not a complainer about it. So how they're doing it. Okay, so maybe I can shape this phrase differently to minimize the chance of that happening in the future. Minimize the chance of you being lied about. Correct. So for me, that is a landscape. There's some landmines here. There's some trap doors here. There's something. And so for me, one who communicates on that landscape, that's just information for me to navigate it slightly more nimbly in the future. Right. Yeah. Got it. Interesting. Gravity. There's one thing that I want to talk about. You still hook up on gravity. Yes. I'm always hooked up on gravity. Because as you should be. Well, since we've talked last, I've been reading a lot about it. And one of the things that confuses me the most is that we don't really understand what gravity is. We know its effects. We can measure them. We know how to measure them. We know what the mass is involved. But we don't really know what gravity is. There's a similar question in the book. But they got a little more philosophical than you just did. But they both lean philosophical. It's science can describe how gravity works. But can they describe why it works? Can we? So this is the how-why duality here. And allow me to just answer it from a how-why point of view. And then we can apply it to gravity after I say that. In science, if we can describe how something works and predict its future behavior, we claim to understand it and we move on. You can ask deeper question about why is their gravity? What is the meaning? What is the purpose? And go ahead, but I'm good with what I've done and I can land a spacecraft on Mars inside of a crater in a hole in one using my understanding of gravity, so I'm pretty good with it. Okay? So I'm not distracted by the more philosophical side of that. Why does it work? Okay. Einstein. So Newton was deeply puzzled by how you can have something called, in which he coined the phrase, action at a distance. Okay? He wrote down the equation that worked. He walked into the equation, the moon goes around the earth, earth goes on the sun. The moons of Jupiter go around Jupiter. He accurately described that with his equations of gravity. Okay. He said, one day I think we're going to find some way that they're connecting to each other, but I don't know what that is right now, but I know my equations work. He called it spooky, it was spooky to him. That's his word, spooky action at a distance. All right. Fast forward, 300 years. 300? No. Fast forward, 250, 230 years. Get to Albert Einstein. Gravity is the curvature of space and time, and you're moving on the curvature of that fabric. That's gravity. Oh my gosh, is it even a force then? So there's no need to think of it as an action at a distance. And in a phrase, first uttered by, I think it was John Orchard-Bolt Wheeler, a student of Einstein, and I learned relativity from John Orchard-Bolt Wheeler. In fact, that's where I met my wife in relativity class in graduate school. It's space. So matter tells space how to curve. Space tells matter how to move. It moves along the curvature of space. You don't need an action at a distance. There is no action. It can't do anything else, but do that. It's like you have a funnel, and you take a ball, and you roll it on the funnel. The ball can only do what that funnel tells it to do. And it'll circle. If you give it a sideways motion, it'll start spinning around. There's no magic hand coming in there. It is following the curvature of its space-time continuum, this construct that you provided for it. So now, I can describe what gravity is doing. I even have a mechanism for it. Are you going to still ask me why is there gravity? Is that answered not fulfilling enough to you, even in the Y department? You can say, well, why would a particle curve space? You can just keep doing that. That's fine. But is there a point where you'll be satisfied with the answer? Oh, that answer is my Y. I can say, well, why did this half liter of water drop off the edge here? Well, it's no longer the forces are in balance. No, but why did it fall? Well, there's nothing holding it up. Why did it... There's a point where it's not especially productive to continue to think about the world that way. Because what I'm claiming is answers to the how, when you understand the how enough, are tan amount to having answered the Y question? That's what I'm telling you. T tan amount in terms of your ability to measure it and accurately use it. Correct. So we can say, okay. But isn't it so serious? You've got a ball. We can say, well, why did you go bald? Well, okay. The hair follicles when you start in your late 20s and when you go bald, when you start losing your hair. Probably late 20s early 30s. Yeah. That's common. If you have your hair when you're 30, you'll probably have it for the rest of your life. That's how that goes. You start losing it up right going up to your 30s. So you can say, well, the hair follicle begins to not producing the keratin or whatever. We get the explanation. Then you say, well, why does the hair follicle stop doing that? Then you say, oh, well, because the DNA has pre-coded about the hair kind of thing. Well, why does the DNA have the hair? Well, because so... But we know far more about how and why people go bald than we do about what gravity really is. Correct. And telling you gravity really is the curvature of space and time. That gets us the big bang and everything we've ever known about. It's a space and time, but it's also based on mass, right? It's based on the amount of mass. If any concentration of matter and energy and or energy will curve the fabric of space and time. And the more mass and the more gravity. And the movement of matter on that fabric of space and time, we call gravity. And I'm good with that. Okay. But you seem a little oddly defensive about something that's scientific. No, I have to say I'm good with it. But you are because you're kind of defending it. No, you can say, well, why does matter... Why do you need to know why? No, why does... That's what you're saying. No, I'm saying, why does matter and energy curve the fabric of space and time. You can ask that. Okay, why? And I don't have an answer if I can say... Well, that's all I'm asking. Well, no, what I'm telling you is... Okay, you don't need to know why. I got you to the point. Right. We had to walk to that point where your why got unanswered. I understand that. But before we got to that point, I answered otherwise. But I'm not disputing that. Good. Good. So what I'm telling you is that I can answer your why question most of the time. But then you'll come back to a point where there's a point where there's the why doesn't have the answer. So you say why did it fall? I say there's a force of gravity operating on it. Why did it fall that way? Because the curvature is space and time. I'm answering your why's. I understand. Then why does matter and energy curve space and time? Okay, that's a frontier. We're still working on that. But that's all I'm asking. That's good. That's fine. You are a man of science. So you're a person that should probably embrace why's. Except many people who ask why questions, they really want to know purpose. Oh, I'm not asking purpose. Well, then that's distinguishes you from many other people who ask why questions. Oh, okay. I don't know if there's purpose or anything. Why did you bang the table? I was angry. There's a purpose behind it. That's the things. So if your why is just a curiosity of what's going on, that's one thing. If you are inquiring about purpose, then it's theological. Because when you're theological, then religions give purpose to life. Clearly, I'm not doing that. But I just think it's amazing that something that's such a massive part of life on this planet that we stayed glued to the ground because of gravity. Can you pull up my Instagram account? I only post Instagram account now. You have an Instagram account now? Because you had a fake one for a while. Yeah, yeah, I took it over. I took it over. Actually, I know the guy. I took it over. He gave it to you? Oh, do the guy read it? No, no, no, no. Actually, sorry. I went to Instagram and said, people think this is a real account and it's not. I put it back. If it's an account, that's an imposter and followers don't know it, it's illegal. Right. There's one that says, fan of Nealtysen. Yes. That's a different one. That's the guy. I know. I only post art house photos that I've taken, most of which I've taken. Just scroll down and look for Muscle Beach. There it is. Click on that. Here's my, go to my caption. Go full screen on that. For most of our life on Earth, we either resist or succumb to the force of gravity. At Muscle Beach, gravity loses every time. That was a pretty true. I was proud of that caption. You call me out on that caption. That's nonsense. Gravity never loses. Gravity doesn't even have little tiny losses. It's not like there's a war and gravity loses a balance. For those just listening to this, so I was in Venice, California. The sun was setting behind some guy who was doing hand presses, suspended up on the chin up bar. It was cool. It was silhouetted. There's a palm tree. There's the beach. He's there. Gravity's going to beat that motherfucker. Let me tell you. Eventually, but while he's there, he's conquer in gravity. Are you getting too old? You haven't conquered gravity lately? No, I work out all the time. I'm not buying it. No! That's sick. I ain't conquered shit. He's pulling rank now. I work out and you don't because I see your middle-aged man belly. When I've talked to other astrophysicists and scientists. Let me ask, are these conversations supposed to have a theme or a purpose? Or is it just you sit there and just whatever comes your head, you send my word? Are you in me? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. How do you say this episode is about? You can't say that. I don't ever do that. You don't do that. Okay. It's just episode number secret to my success. I don't know. You got no commitments. How the fuck can I ever have a threat? Think about all the different people I have here. Of course. It's like impossible between fighters and scientists and scholars and crack pots. There's a bunch of different people coming through here, man. I can't have any agenda. All right. I mean, that's probably the only reason why this thing is successful as it is. But that's a weird one for people. That this one thing that is so powerful. What is? Oh, gravity. That's a weird one for people. Yeah. I mean, it seems like you're frustrated by all the various questions. No, no. You seem a little defensive there. No, because I thought you were taking your why to ultimately mean purpose. No, no. Why? I'm claiming that many responses to how are also responses to a why. That's the point I'm making. And I don't like splitting definitions. Well, ultimately, understanding gravity. I think we do. That's why we can land things on Mars. We understand that. I think we do, which is why your cell phone gets time from GPS satellites that is pre-corrected for Einstein's general theory of relativity, because they're in a different gravitational field than you orbit than you are on Earth's surface. We got this. You're getting angry. No. We're running short on time here. So I set you something that I wanted to ask you. What's that? I sent you an email. Did you get that email? Oh, I did. I did. It was about a black hole that landed in a mysterious place in our understandings. Yes. Yeah. Let me just give the readers' digest version of this. There are black holes that are formed at the consequence of the death of stars. We think we understand the formation of stars well enough to say, well, stars are born with this much mass, and it'll lose certain amount of mass over its life, all stars lose mass, because there's so much pressure and so much energy coming out. It carries particles with it. So they lose mass. The sun is losing mass. As we speak, it's called the solar wind. So everybody loses mass out there. The question is, at what rate are you losing mass? Is it a lot compared to your total mass? Is it small? So very high mass stars are not especially stable objects. They remain stars for 100,000 at most in million years, and they'll explode and become a supernova. If you're more massive than that, they will not explode because the gravity is so strong that it cannot explode against the strength of the gravity and it collapses into a black hole. So we expect black holes to have slightly less mass, somewhat less mass, than the most massive stars that we know how to make. So if you have 100 times the mass of the sun star, it'll lose half its mass over its life, and you have a black hole that's 30 times the mass of the sun or 50 times the mass of the sun. Fine. Put a pin in that. In the centers of galaxies, there are supermassive black holes. Hundreds of thousands, millions times the mass of the sun. And we call it their supermassive, and there are black holes we call them supermassive black holes, and that's how we roll as astrophysicists. Alright. Well, could you have black holes somewhere in the middle of these two extremes? We do not know a phenomenon that will give you a black hole that's in between these two categories. You can make a black hole that eats its way there. Fine. But we don't know how to make one. And we think we, my colleagues who've done this, I think they've discovered a black hole that is sitting in this sort of nether world, where there's no evidence that it ate to become that massive. And we don't know how to explain it by the formation and death of stars, and is nowhere near the supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy. So it's the frontier of research at this moment. So it's just a newly discovered type of black hole here? It's in a mass regime that they physically impossible, you know, headlines, we're reading the headline now, black hole shock. Show me the, where this appears? Express, so this is a British. I think they're British. Anyhow, it's a news digest for science. So black hole shock theories swirl around the discovery of a physically impossible black hole. So scientists don't use the word impossible unless it's violating a known law of physics. So I bet that was a editor's title. And I don't have a problem. I don't mind a little bit of sensationalism there. You can say it is a black hole that comes from an, if it comes from an object, it is an object we know nothing about and have yet to discover. We're not going to say it's an impossible object. Every time we point the telescope to the universe, we find something that we never predicted or understood. And it adds to the knowledge base that we already have whenever they do discover things. And then it becomes what we know and understand, like the supermassive black holes at the center of every galaxy. That was a fairly recent discovery in terms of hypocurism. It was hypothesized because we saw the centers of galaxies behaving really weirdly. Things stars were moving faster than they should have given how much gravity was tugging on them. And we said, dude, something's got to be there. And it's got to be really small because we're tracking stars really close to the middle. Well, if it was made of ordinary matter, how big it would have to be really, really big. So this has to be really, really small in order for this to happen. The only thing we know that could fill that small volume and have that much gravity is a black hole. So it was suspected for a long time. It was confirmed that as a common thing by the Hubble telescope and first photographed by this recent research, this recent result in the galaxy M87. Messier 87 is what it's name of the galaxy. And you can determine how big the black hole is based on the size of the galaxy. We can determine the mass of the black hole by how fast stars are moving at the distance they are from it. So in other words, so we're earth orbiting the Sun. We have a certain speed. We're going about, I forgot how to do it. What? 18 miles per second. I think that's the number. 30 kilometers a second. That's our speed around the Sun. That's pretty fast. Okay? If the Sun had more mass, instantly, that speed is not enough to maintain our orbit. And we'll start spiraling in towards it. If the Sun had less mass, that speed is too high to be in this orbit. It'll take it to a, sorry, it's too fast to maintain this orbit. It'll climb us out to a higher orbit, slow us down, and it will be in a higher orbit with a slower speed. So in other words, for any object, at any distance, there's only one speed you can maintain and have a stable orbit around it. So when we see stars orbiting something in the center of the galaxy, it is a straightforward astro 102 equation to calculate how much mass the thing is orbiting. And you get the mass and you can't see it. It's small. It's a black hole. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is the end of the podcast. This book will be available when, sir. It comes out in October, first week of October. I'm very proud of this book. It's my most heartfelt thing that I've ever done. Well, when it comes out, I will take a photograph and put it up on the Instagram and the Twitter. Everybody know about it. Yeah, and it's a, it also has letters from people in prison. A person who just learned that they were, had terminal cancer. I mean, there's a lot of people reaching out. Just responding to letters. Yes, it's me responding. And their letters, I can't fit all of their letters. Some are very long tones. But most of the letters, their letters, and then all of my correspondences in there. So it's my most heartfelt contribution to this universe. And StarTalk is still a podcast. We're still going. Still going. StarTalk would pump it up 50 episodes. And it's television show. Yeah, so we're, we can see if we're going to have a new season. We don't know yet. That's to be announced. But we're going. So it's always a podcast and we got a YouTube channel. StarTalk YouTube channel. And we're thinking of branching out into other kinds of educational product that's still fun and comedic and the like. And I love your support for this because you're also a comedian. So you know the value. And I love comedians that have their fundamental part of how we deliver a science to the public on StarTalk. So thanks for for that plug. My pleasure, my friend. Dude, thank you. Always good. Thank you very much. Bye everybody. Oh, thank you. 
 The Joe Rogan Experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day So friend giant boxing fan he sends me this text message he goes dude check this shit out and it's you training with Half-El Cordero and I remember looking at it and going oh shit what happened What happened because the last time you were in here you were talking about how you didn't want to work out Yeah, cuz it would ignite the ego Hey, let's talk about that too So um I was discussing my wife something about me being overweight you know me have to get some time for like a plan in your wife Will you wouldn't pick her around some kind of perspective and she said well wanted you to get on this Trident for 15 minutes a day. I thought she said just 15 minutes or it went from 15 minutes a day to two hours a day And um That's what you were worried about yeah exactly um I was complaining about my weight and so um I I don't know I guess I tried on some clothing. It was disastrous And so I was worried about my weight and she told me the 15 minute round to win two hours a day and um I just started losing weight and then um somebody came on personal and said hey Mike I know you're not gonna want but somebody said would you fight this guy for like 40 million 30 million but I said man Get the fuck out of my world. I said hold this is a thing I said whoa I said well who would they like me to fight and said one minute and then it's Bob's hat But okay, and so I'm saying to myself well, I know Bob I said no Because I know Bob is digging strong. I said hold one minute How would they like me to fight him kind of fight him in the market for Queen Mary rule and he said one minute Mike He asked the guy the guy said yes, I said I fight him right and so this Bob Sap was the first one that was brought up Yeah, and so once and for people don't know Bob Sap Bob Sap was a giant fighter and pride at one time He was like three hundred seventy five pounds and fighting all the kickboxers solid muscle and abs Yes, incredible right and um it went from him to somebody else and another guy in the man The niska and then somehow know some other fighters vandered and went from Who else was another heavyweight champ? We just a bunch of guys up here ain't fight and they say you know It came down the road. I had to do and I'm like, I don't know what the hell is going on And then he signed the contract I signed the contract next thing. No, I'm in the gym again And this disaster is I'm trying to get in the shape. I'm saying it my Really do this shit You know you you would probably know because if you Getting in shape and getting conditioned the two different animals. They don't even belate belong in the same Work out the vision of working out like it in shape is just being kind of fit. Yes You know getting in shape is able to fit your clothes right right? You know that's getting in shape being able You have to fit your clothes being in condition is being able to come outside of your soul Yeah, you can't do that automatically. You're talking about being in fighting conditions. Yes. Yeah. Yeah, that's a rare state And you can't keep it for very long. No, it is just people need to understand that right the emotional state to prepare for that is Oh my Well, that's what I was seeing when I was seeing you hit the pads I'm like this isn't just working out there was something going on man when you were working out with Cordero And you rip into the body and throw in those hooks. I was like this isn't man who's preparing to go to combat This is not normal getting ready to work out shit. That's why when I saw that video. I was like oh I'm gonna take something about that video. Yeah, I did that video and I was in bed for a week That was 30 seconds and I was in bed for a week And it's not funny because it made me realize that this is this is this is big boy shit Okay, this big boy shit you with that is right there. That wasn't really cool. That's in the gym. That's now the thing is though That's now that's that's going for you know five and six rounds. That's now, but I'm talking about before that 30 seconds The first time I ever did it I could um What's the shit you could when you can't oh, sorry, I had everything came and everything all that shit They came back to make me quit boxing all those pains started coming back So when you started training again, did you start doing it slowly after that extremely slowly and then I started um dabbing in an alternative stuff like what kind of stuff Priot therapy type shit cryo stem cell research and therapy and some other interesting stuff that I don't know and this is just beautiful stuff like what kind of stuff I don't know hyperbaric chamber than just everything everything to help you recover It's really interesting. It is it well. I saw you when you walked in today. I was like god damn you look good You look good dude, like your muscles look good. You look like your vascular you look fit and that's um And I'm starting to feel fit That's what's interesting. I know what they do and stuff like I think I'm in shape and then the next thing you know You think you're in shape and then you start having like um rafia start throwing punches at me It's like a fight and I can't punch back like I got a boy and then two rounds go by you need to whoa I'm not in shape. I'm in the bag six rounds. I'm doing this three five round six and I'm jumping rope And then I do two rounds of somebody is a whole different psychological Corporation and who how much how much time has gone since you first started exercising like when did it's when did it start So here we are with like august 23rd or something like that 22nd what when did when did it start? I had to start um Something like April April so want something like that in the middle of the lockdown Yeah, so you just just started just training And now here you are five months later four months later How far away do you think you are to being in like fighting shape? Oh Fighting shape one of the time come back by um november 28th. Yeah, that's when you'd be ready exactly Now, why did you guys decide to move you were supposed to be in September right was supposed to be We're the viewing um situation Um at the proper timing for more people for audiences. Yeah, yeah That nature it's so exciting So it's gonna be awesome because um it's gonna be um me and everyone else that's involved arrows and anyone Innovation then we're gonna start off the legends only league and that's gonna be really Breath taking especially starting off with me and Roy Yeah, and um I'm looking forward to that to have actually from every general it's On a ray of everybody who was Who believed the someone they all gonna come back and all feels and this will be something that mean um The arrows and the ventures created together and I think this is gonna be pretty awesome So legends only league would be like all sports baseball Yes, I think maddening and crazy like we did with Billie Jean that came to have somebody yes say One of the serene and somebody playing mac and roll and that kind of stuff right exhibitions and stuff like that or somebody like um Man-a-war complete one-on-one with whoever I ever seen or somebody yeah, I mean men at peace Men awards the horse Metamorphose yeah, yeah, no, it's a amazing idea, but particularly for you like seeing you hit the bag again And seeing you hit the pads and get excited about it. It was very very interesting to me Because I knew that you had that thing in your head where you didn't want to ignite your ego And then you had this quote that the gods of war reignited your ego I read that I got so excited Well, that's the excuse I can use you know, I think really great excuse that I can use But it's uh it was a great quote and made me excited and I when I'm when I'm seeing you training I mean, you know, so some people that In everybody has opinions when something like this happens when a man is 53 now you 54 Yeah 54 and decides to fight again It's as fit as you look like why not why not why not you could do whatever you want why can't I mean if you can go bungee jumping and ride a ball It's not Impossible is nothing to somebody that tries Everything that someone said was impossible is happened. Yeah, it's certainly well listen in 2020 with all the ways of recovering All the things we know the sanitation is create impossible. Well, it's different now limitations are different now exactly So when you like that video when you were ripping the pads and working out with half El Cordero How many like how long into that was that like how how quickly did you get your speed back? Was it right right away? It was a first day. That was your first day That was our first thing. Let's try this that was our first day Wow, and after that day I was in the bed They come get the guy to do the fucking shot. Now let you keep me to get me back I had to say I didn't I couldn't walk I was crying to my wife and I was like wow And I don't know why um after that I should say this is over. I'm not gonna do it But um that ego stuff for hey come on please Did it? Does it do you feel like you felt in the old days like when I mean in terms of your mind like the enthusiasm about this The dude and do the asm yet Um Sometimes um I feel I say this is bullshit. I can't be feeling this good You know and then um And I don't know I think I really am I'm feeling good. I said this bag was because I know the bag is bigger bag 20 pounds I said well this bag wouldn't be moving like this. I'm not hitting it kind of decently, you know You look good. There's look this is not like there. I've seen guys come back and you see him working out to look sad And it doesn't look what's exciting about you coming back is how good you look training Why not in this day and age but being a real fighter. This is what you know You see so many people that's in the gym matter fact I've bought people in the gym that kick my ass every day But then know what's different when you get them in the ring and yeah, the light on them and people eating popcorn and drinking beer and they freak out ah So yeah the pressure black. Yes, you're Mike Tyson. Exactly. You understand that Yeah, I know if anybody knows how to deal with that pressure. It's you absolutely, but you know you it's good But if you don't have to doubt you're gonna have a lot of trouble, right? You have to have that doubt Right, you have to have a little bit of that. Yeah. Now is it this is a This new phase of your life where all of a sudden you reignited and you want to compete again. This has got to be fun It is fun, but yeah, it is fun. I do say it's fun, but it's still um If apprehensive stuff You know with apprehensive, but it's still like you said is it's fun But it seems so exciting like to watch you train and get ready it's like to me I'm like fuck yeah like what what do you want a man to do? What do you want a man to just sit around do nothing just wait go for walks do whatever the fuck you want and if you could still do this the way you're doing it why not? Hey I don't understand it either but I'm gonna do it. I don't understand. I just want to do it and um I feel like I was born to do this stuff Well, you certainly were at one point in time in your life But you had moved on to a different chapter of your life you had completely stopped doing that You were doing the Tyson ranch thing smoking a lot of weed. Are you stop smoking weed totally much? Yeah pretty much stop It's gonna stop wow Wow, that's that's a big change But when you do something like this is all about change, you know you you listen You can't continue being a comedian if you're not sharpening Your psychic up even when you're doing it right here. You're practicing in your comedian act You know you have to continue to practice the more you practice it if they've you practice it every four years You'll be better if you only practice it for a month So the more you do it the better you become do you feel like that now in this comeback that like you are only sort of scratching your potential because like you're just getting back into shape again a Year from now you'll be even better shape and you'll be more conditioned to do what you want to do like you're you're in this Yeah, yeah, you're in this Rebuilding stage now is in that that's exciting. Yeah, when you go to you When you go to your doctor these people who have this alternative stuff and you see the development you see the healing process And you think come on tell me why did it thrive this happening to me Why not even why guy like me who just got off drugs? Who just gave up his life and don't care about nothing? Hit this is happening to him, you know since I married my wife all this good stuff started happening I said why what is this stuff all about? Whatever it's all about it's good. I'm like take really great take the money. Yeah, that's what I said Take my money. I want to watch it. Let's see it and it's not about money because the money's gonna be in charity And people under and it's just about doing something good and that from that perspective that could be I just like feeling like I'm doing something good for somebody more than myself That's a beautiful part of it. Yeah, that it is gonna go to charity But it's also an exciting matchup and I'm watching Roy workout too and Roy looks fantastic Roy's gonna always look fantastic He was under pound of a way. He's gonna look He just really looks good when he got this right Jones junior I mean that's one of the things that makes this fight so exciting is that You know Roy is like yourself one of the all-time grades and still looks physically fantastic Like seeing moving around hitting the pads hand speed looks great. You can't train with anybody looking for do that Right, well, he always had such an unusual style, you know with very few jobs We threw left hooks instead of jobs, you know, man Roy always had like one of the strangest styles in all the boxing It was it was trained, but it was very effective super effective. Yeah, I mean effect just incredibly hard to prepare for too Because try to find someone who no one's gonna do that. Yeah, no one can emulate him in the gym now When you decided on a fight and decided on a poem what with a with their other I heard that someone that offered you shanning the cannon breaks for a bad knuckle boxing. No, no, it was just Tyson the Tyson fury With Bob sat Tyson fury and quite other guys, but certain things just happened and it didn't happen and then I'm It was holy feel it was shanning with some other guys from MMA and then Roy turned out to be the right guy. I guess we did a survey and Roy popped up the winner Well certainly a giant name Holy if you wanted that yeah, yeah, holy feel would be a great one too But it's just having a guy like that that has that big name that is also an all-time great and that also wants to do it too and they get the public excited I mean I think it's a perfect fight to get the public exactly So do you think that once you fight Roy that that'll be it or do you think this is just gonna be the beginning of this new chapter in your life? I believe this is just gonna be the beginning or whatever happens happens Life this is pretty interesting being on here talking to you and knowing that Extended the wave and the people are gonna hear this stuff is pretty interesting because this is now this is true It's really gonna no longer in my head. I'm stroking it. It's real. It's like wow Yeah, it's wow. Yeah, I can't wait man. I want to be there. I want to see it. Hey Down the street here I'll come back now I forgot the name of the dignity center. Mm-hmm. That's where it's gonna be Yeah, yeah, and is it gonna be an audience? It can't be an audience. Yeah, right? I believe on it You know, I believe on you like I don't know what what I'm gonna say on to us right? They call me on people. Yeah, oh family fight group and this is gonna be eight rounds. I believe so yeah So how did you arrive on eight rounds? Hey listen? Beats the hell out of me. I wanted to do the exhibition I wanted to help the people after what like I eat fucking rounds by now. I'm getting in a condition and we're gonna do this stuff Well eight rounds gives you enough time to work Guess people enough time to get excited about it When when you think about an eight round fight Do you see see yourself moving into 10 rounds and 12 rounds in the future and how we don't know what the future holds But we're looking forward to you having fun and doing it for Purpose of reason because people were talking about you literally fighting for the title again Hey, I'm not interested. I'm just interested in fighting for the title of giving Okay, okay, so just doing this for good so exciting for you But also generates a lot of positivity. Yeah, I love that and I'm so cleaning for some reason because you're giving away charity that you're doing something good Doing it for myself. I guess this doesn't do it for me no more. Right. That makes sense. I didn't do it Yeah, that makes sense. So it's both things so you get to excite yourself challenge yourself But the good is all going to next I won't have in my mind when I'm getting paid. I think I'll never have that in my mind again Yeah, I know what I have all I'm getting something for what I'm doing kind of yeah Somebody said and this was kind of hilarious someone said hey I heard that they're just gonna just mess around and then they're not gonna go for the knockout I go do you know who the fuck you're talking about? I go you're talking about Mike Tyson and Roy Jones, Jr Do you really believe that the two of the all-time greats once they start throwing hands that it could it won't get crazy? Well, of course, of course both of us who we are and we're gonna show us girls And nobody's gonna look stupid and it's just gonna be interesting, I think yeah Do you have any other people in mind like do you have a game plan in mind like after Roy or you just thinking only about Roy right now? After this moment only Roy, but it's just some interesting people that we have that I'm gonna announce later Now there was some talk of you and Roy way back then day when Roy fought John Ruiz and one day anyway Yeah, yeah, so what what did you think about that fight back then? I thought it was really interesting because I couldn't use the money back then so me and Roy talked we wouldn't in Texas and we went to Houston with the Houston we went to Houston we talked and After we talked we just went out and chilled out, but it was interesting never happened I don't know what happened to me something what happened to me and it just didn't happen That's one of those things right there's always all these potential fights that don't quite line up Do you have other fights in your head that like were potential fights that didn't line up that you wish did? No, I have the happen for the reason that it's happening now I'm excited about this fight. I'm excited about this fight stylistically too because I always I always like that fight stylistically I was so it was so interesting You know because you were just this unstoppable force and Roy was so fast and so slick Yes, I'm just prepared to do a lot of running and chasing Yeah, you know, yeah, I was that was real difficult to get in condition for that I'm chasing this like a little guy I'm the ring so how many days a week are you training now every day every day? You know have the sun days off every day and what what is a typical day for Mike Tyson right now? All right, the day starts Soon as this daylight from 5 30 out through the form of run come back What am I doing when I come back? I'm back in the shower from the shower I go downstairs I let the birds out fly the birds come back in May do some I'm I have a machine where you do the twist Mm-hmm. I've got your sizes there and I'll do that probably 200 times on both sides and I'm I Grab a bite, you know, I may have some I'm eating me first. I may have some eggs Instead of not eating eggs. You were a vegan for a while right how long were you vegan for pretty good couple years for a couple years? Yeah, five years when did it stop when did you stop doing that? I don't know not too long ago, so did you stop because of the training or did you stop before that? Yeah, this stop Reeding because of the training and it was because of what I wanted my body to look like and Disturnt that I wanted to possess so you started eating meat red meat everything and no red meat But only Elk and bison. Oh red meat does mean yeah, okay wild stuff you eating Elkin bite to I want to give you some of my Elk yeah, really would you Fuck yeah Yeah, yeah, I will be free to do that. I'll give you some from that elk right there That would be so awesome. Yeah, I have three commercial freezers in the back. Yeah, I would love that I would love that Yeah, when I look at for I don't look at food. No, like I used to look at I look at it for what it's for yeah Yeah, even what it's for to take care of the body exactly Well, that's the best meat. You know, I realized that this you know things that are good for other people like the the kale and the vegetables and all this stuff The blueberry and then for me it's really poisonous It's not that stuff bad for you but yeah, that's definitely not good for my blood type and my health conditions and all that's Kale all that's okay. Oh kill me Well, no actually that really yeah for me I'm careless toxic to my blood and everything so when you were a vegan What were you eating oh man nothing That my wife called me the miserable vegan She's not vegan. What you're doing Mike? Just being miserable. No, I think it comes down to um when um And it's interesting that I've done it when I was with cuss I was sometimes just overdo it sometimes Like sometimes I go for religious fast for 30 days. I might overdo it sometimes. I might not eat for the whole day That's for the daytime Right and then I might for a couple of days. It's not even period Don't you think but that's just your championship mentality, right? Like you're always pushing yourself even when it comes to something like fasting I have something to do with suffering. I don't know what is that camp on my family's on either by how much I long Can I suffer more than this person that that person okay? This person do what I did right right right I remember you saying that too about training that you would get up in the morning and train because you wanted an edge You wanted to know that you were training while they were asleep exactly. Yeah, I remember thinking that back when I was doing martial arts I remember reading that I'm like I want to do that too. I copy a lot of shit You did well you always have to have in if and even if it's not so so you have to have and that's where delusion comes in because Delusion is only delusional when you don't accomplish the goal of making your delusions a reality right? That's what it's delusional right you you're just Enforcing your mindset. Oh, yeah to allow those delusions to be the reality of your Acceptment now when you're doing this and you're getting up in the morning and running does this like Do you feel like you felt in the old days? Do you I mean I don't mean physically? I mean the mind like you're preparing for war again Do you do does this does this like reignite those old thoughts the way you were when you were the champ the way you were when you're on your way to the title Like this is a this is a whole new way of life. No, it's really interesting that sometimes Period, but sometimes I struggle with the fact of why the possibly actually hurt somebody like you don't want to hurt them What do you mean be struggle struggle with the possibility that you could hurt them? That is sometimes It's all got to make them times Hmm. Yeah Like some fights like particularly like Tyrell Biggs or someone that you had problems with someone that you you had animosity towards So we could finally get your hands on them. Hey Um What does it means when fighting gets you get you wrecked? What does that mean? It's a good question Means you're getting excited. Yeah So that that's going through your mind right now Well, that's how I get when I was a kid and I you know sometimes I get the twinkle the twinkle Yeah, well that's what I'm saying is like you reached a state as a human being as a champion as a Forotious fighter you reached a state of of Ability and of accomplishment the very few humans will ever ever touch and feel That's why I'm asking you when you're running when you're hitting the bag when that heart's beating again And that you know who you are your mic mother fucking Tyson So when you're doing all this shit again, you're still Mike Tyson those thoughts. I've got to be burning inside you again It's got to be pretty wild I don't know. It's um It's wild, but I'm I believe is um is rightfully so to be that way and I just know how to I don't think I'm massive. I just know how to deal with it. I don't let it overwhelm me No, well of course not but saying that It gets your orgasmic That's a strange thing to say. Well, that's just what I'm wanting to find out because you're really bright And I thought you were sick. No, I'm being very serious. No, I know I Know you're being serious, but I mean no one will understand that other than you Like that's your your mindset like no one wanted But I think that like all the things we were talking about before the way you drive yourself the way you push yourself The way you put yourself into that frame of mind. No one's gonna understand that other than you So no one's gonna understand you get an erection from thinking about hurting someone More than you will you don't have to be fear based in somewhere fear based Maybe or um maybe just Maybe not fear based, but maybe embracing the fact that you're gonna go into this with everything that you have the chaos of it all and The ultimate goal is to hurt somebody the ultimate goal is to be extremely successful the way you can be extremely successful The thing you do great is to crush people So to him they have that encompass everything this fighting is the only thing I don't ask our law for um I just thought I asked him for help for that you don't ask him for help for fight. Yeah, because you think you got it No, I just don't think I get you know, I think you should ask I just don't want to be involved with that kind of mindset and I long So I know you know people do they go to I just don't I just don't because it's just I don't like the way I think you know what God to be you know involved with the way I think at that time Well, this is what's so interesting to me about you fighting again because of the conversation that we had the last time you were here That you didn't want to reignite your ego Clearly your ego's blazing right now. I mean you're ready to go well maybe because I um I'm an addict of form of addict and I'm gonna knock out a green the cameras on me. Yeah, I'm a big knock out It can maybe right that has nothing to do it as well, but I like to think it's under control until the night of the event That yeah the night of the event so it's the the addiction will get purged with the with the performance Yeah, that's why um, you know, I was I was doing um if you don't mind me then to rub for a second. I was um The book that talks you what they call it audiobook and it was called um The jean key okay, there's book in the book was explaining about why that we are Who we are in that perspective that most of the people like you and myself and people people yes in general Who is not at that level even anyone to have a creative mind Is victimized to depression? Mm-hmm and the reason is because um When that creative when that moment that whatever it is That causes that creativity is not Fed the proper information that is successful and that is accepted and whatever Spaces of the brain in a mind that once it wants to be accepted. It is not accepted. It crumbles Mm-hmm. Did that make sense? Well, I feel like with someone like you the highs that you reach in competing the highs you reach in fighting are so high That it's probably very difficult to it's probably very difficult to just exist Outside of that and I know you love pot for that reason because it calmed you down and meled you out and chilled you out Absolutely um, it made me like myself. Mm-hmm. Do you understand that? Yeah, I do. Yeah, it makes me like myself It gives you forgiveness of yourself. Yeah, I agree with that. Yeah, never thought about that I never wanted to be forgiven much because that's really powerful stuff. Yeah, they have to accept forgiveness It's really and to forgive yourself. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, it's hard to forgive other people sometimes it's harder to forgive yourself Yes, and marijuana makes you feel like it makes me more compassionate makes me more friendly It makes me want to hug people because more of a sense of community Exactly make me like people who I believe did something wrong to me It's okay My man. Yeah, it's like he didn't mean it. You just all fucked up just like me. Yeah, I'm drunk. I'm a bloated bruh Yeah, but oh god the the fighting thing that that that feed that that experience is it it's a different experience And it's it's it's got to be so hard for a world championship fighter of your caliber to exist with like regular Normal boring life, you know when you're training and you you're ramping yourself up for a big fight And then you have that big fight and you you know You knock out spinks in front of the whole world and you're walking around the ring and you're on the cover of every magazine That the highs of that the accomplishment the training and then the competing itself is the the experience is so Alien to most people that when you walk around with regular folks in regular life It's got to it's got to be hard to exist. No, it's not it's just that um You have to know who you can be at certain times in your life. No one knows who they are because if you know who you were right now You'd be really limited, you know because life is about change you'll be told then five years from now You'd be a different person won't be this person so we're gonna have to have Develop some kind of emotional intelligence and just learn the great as time goes on Graph What's ever going on and just form with it as it changed you changed with it because it's very difficult When times change to change with the times right and you have to be conscious of that and the times is not The people around you the time is the development and time you have left in this planet that you have to develop Who you are? How difficult is it to make that change though to become a different person other than a world championship fighter Like when you decided to stop was it difficult what time will make you that person time will At time will make you that person. What is time? I don't know right But time has also made you that person again now though now now it's reignited Now new time has come and now you're training again Exactly, but I think this is done Mostly for my health For my immortality more than anything subconsciously. I think that's what the what the reason why I did it just to get help Yeah, and this stuff goes on then this and then I meet a doctor and say hey, you know You should do this and then and you should try to upset them. So I'm like you never try to stem But this is what really got me interested in this stuff I thought I interviewed Which I like to do you as well on my podcast If you if you license to do is your contract one. Oh, yeah, for sure. So I had the opportunity to um Talk to kids Shamrock. Okay, and so he came in and I looked at him and said fuck he looked and crashed What the fuck hey, what are you doing right now? Why you look like that? How's that happened? And he said it was in Columbia and I said when give me I'm going tomorrow Right, but um, I had some people nearby that happened to be introduced to and they were or um They're on the top I never really set that bio accelerator police down in Columbia. Is that what it is? I didn't go there. Is that where Henry so who don't want? I have no idea who went there I'm not doing that I knew it in Columbia and um, I met some other people who were um Yes on top of the game on their game with this anti-aging all the stuff going on with this alternative stuff also and so um I met these people with it was just amazing stuff So You're able to now train all these days a week you you have uh Like how many months in now you you're solid since April yeah, and you attribute that mostly to all these different alternative methods of Especially um, Mr Gentlemen that we call his name is Brad row. We call him the mechanic the electrician that is and he and he works through You know current fourths and that was oh electro muscular simulation This totally different is in that family, but it's just totally superior than that That's just so antiquated compared to this stuff, you know So uh You you you were talking about your ability to you're running in the morning and now what's the afternoon? It's like what are you doing in the afternoon? I'm that's when I'm training I'm on a clock I'm in the gym. I'm doing the training um two-thirty I'm probably talking on the phone and And Flipping some deals making arrangements probably to do other show the commercial or else some ads and just So yeah, I've been this stuff and then how did you get hooked up with hot fell Cordero because for folks who don't know He's legendary trainer in MMA. He's from shoot the box in Brazil He was one of the the top guys back when shoot the box was the number one MMA camp in Brazil where Anderson Silva and Vanderlei I found this out later, but this is how this happened the two of us met um I say hey, you know, I like to hit the mitts, you know, you think I hit the mitts with somebody you think you got somebody around to get the mitts I was gonna ready to go to Freddy's gym Freddy Roach. Yeah, and then um I said they had Rafael and I thought let me check about and it was he was just perfect Is he near you? Does he live near you or something? He lives in Laguna. I'm in Newport What is another laguna close enough? Yeah, that's close. That's real close. So he's there. I believe in um Yeah, he's a great trainer. We just came from Vegas instead. We just um Just hanging out, you know, had to go someplace and um, he's just um Cool cool before I met him before the um pandemic, but that's what I mean we came before pandemic And vague it's the remap I guess at the um one of the UFC fights And then I met him over here, and I was saying I wanted to miss him and that's how We um Got back together. He's a great man like a good person. No the reason why I kept nothing to say because he was awesome with the myth because he put so much peace and love and stuff to the family He's a man. This is images. Yeah, it's awesome. Yeah, he's got great energy. He's being loved Like in the MMA world and all by all the people that he trains with everyone loves You can't find a person to say a bad word about that man And he's a very good trainer and he's he also was a guy like I was that style that hot that shootbox style They were very aggressive and I was like oh, that actually makes sense him and you know, yeah When we do drills the drills are what's going on with no we hitting the myths Is no use hey hit them in pop pop pop it's boom. We're moving. It's like that. Yeah, I'm hot Yeah, hot beating hard breathing and we just working at it Yeah, I'm watching and I'm saying this is it's interesting because he's doing he's got you doing a lot of like side to side and angles I do eight Mac eight rounds on the bag and I do four rounds with me in the moment Oh, you see that hot book says that bag where what was that bag was that was that even really workout? Yeah You know, he said with that really even a workout with what was that the warm me up for this? What was that about? You don't even know that existed after you get the four five so when you go from April when you first start doing it again to now How much better do you feel? less than that That was just a joke at the beginning, you know right now. It's really Perkin up It feels like real training. Yeah, it does is taking that deep breath Do you feel like you could train as hard as you did back when you were in your prime? Well, listen, um, you have a tape here. Don't you? Is there a film that someone do you have a film of my tape with me hitting the myths in my prime and see me hitting the myths now? I bet we do Hit the myth in 88 let me hit the myth from last weekend. You tell me no, listen, I'll tell you you were fucking fantastic That's what's interesting about it. Wow. That's me. Look at this. Yeah, it's just that more endurance back then than that, but now I'm catching up. Well, that's what it's interesting about it It's not like watching an old fighter that has lost it that's just trying to compete It's like watching an old fighter regain those old skills like you look great, man. That's what's crazy about it I'm just gonna work on this and work off it and keep working on it and see what it's goes It's so exciting. I love it. I love it when I announce the I'm not listening. This is um Johnny Ryan the guy that works with us and arrows and stuff When we announced the fights he got um we got in 2.5 billion hits I'm serious. I believe it. I believe it. No, this is gonna be a huge fight I mean this fight is probably gonna be one of the biggest fights of all time It turns a pay-per-view and turns a people buying it and watching it and turns and turns in great video turns of helping people as well Of Roy and you training together. There's a compilation It's pretty much like for my speed and my guy damn feel my mother knows that they speed that up and my wife today That's a nod. I think they did not that's um the electrician oh the uh the yeah, brother electrical muscular stimulation shit. Yeah No, it doesn't look like it's sped up. It looks like you still have a speed. That's what it looks like That's what's so exciting about it. What a king's MMA shirt on. Yeah That's so exciting It's so exciting, man. It really is I'm I'm a hundred percent into this and I can't wait for the fight to go down. It's gonna be November 18th now, right? Um, believe that 28 28 28 Oh, there's enough time for fans and everybody and things gonna be home and they'll be able to view it For the holidays and just be able to help more people and more people that view it This is so exciting man No, are you doing weightlifting? Are you doing any swimming like what are the kind of When that shop commercial that was only some stuff and um we don't a little way to get a lot of raps and just doing a lot of So you have a strength and conditioning coach Brad row. Okay, so he's doing yeah, yeah, Brad row I've no I heard that name before weightlifting champ change chain weightlifting champs and all that stuff And um, he's just an awesome person to be it's kicking butt and how many days a week you doing strength conditioning Along with your running and then from one 20 to Friday. I think we do Saturdays too. I think I'm bored. Let's just go Saturday Wow How good is it feel to get back at shape again, man and to look great. Hey, it feels awesome But it's listen to nothing easier about it. You know getting in shape is ease not easy. It's just It's continuous stuff. It's yeah, it's consistency. There it is. They go big old brad So How the fuck did they talk you any getting in the ocean with sharks? What was that all about listen? Um, I don't know how they did this The money wasn't really that great You know, and I'm sorry shock world. It was guys underpaid me and They had had me out there. I was there and um It was really interesting man It was really interesting. I'm just saying how did these guys get me in here? Yeah, I was wondering the same thing And little Dana don't even do me fell. I don't find one Mike the fail The tonic Mike do a couple of games with these guys, and I'm saying thanks a lot, then you really like me Dana really like me. I'm saying they were I didn't really care about me He's ever get the fire. I don't want to see my fire. I want to see Mike go fuck with some sharks Yeah, I would I would say fighting is probably safer Ha ha ha You're Dana didn't want you to fight right yeah, but they want me to go with sharks though Why didn't he want you to fight did you talk about it? No, no, I you see he has never seen it totally seen and watch me Once you saw you then he changed his mind. Yeah Once I think when someone sees the dedication that you have that you're actually fit and you're actually moving fast And you actually can compete at a very high level. I used to have to realize that um I'm gonna go to Russian. I like that no more. I got to move around. I got to do it in a different way Cuz I tried to go in in the first time spot and it was disaster So I went in there thanking you to my head moving and things went the way I wanted How long in training was the first time you sparred Fifth time I bought 15 years first time you sparred in 15 years and how many months in the training was that from from you started in April So like when did you start sparring? The really boxing stuff Box boxing stuff is when I did that stuff with um The blind stuff of Rafael first time right, but but I'm being me first sparring first sparring rounds Yeah, it was really weird and stuff, but I realized when I was getting hit boom boom boom I get hit a couple of times. I didn't go and what the fuck am I doing? I said wait I belong here Ah it brought it back. Yeah, I said I belong here. I got rock boom boom boom I got rock and I hooked the ring and boom I said whoa my name panic. I said well, I belong here Wow, I belong here. So I move in and throw it down to him. I said whoa I belong here Nice, I never said what the fuck am I doing this shit is crazy. It just never happened never happened That I was expecting that you're expecting the what the fuck am I doing? Fuck this shit hey hey stop fuck this shit nigga. I ain't doing this shit But um, that's what I was expecting really bad. That's it whoa boom on boom boom Well, I belong then you felt it and you readjusted the first thing I said I said whoa, I belong here Nice how long did it take before you start feeling comfortable sparring the next time I spard again really yeah So the next time you spard again You just could get back into the mindset of what it's like to be competing and moving with another person Yeah, and you can't go for the kill because you know not your body's not moving for the kill now You gotta have you have to develop the relation. Oh, this is gonna be interesting when you hear this And if I'd probably just understand that more as he gets older you have to develop We're queen a relationship with your mind in your body. Mm-hmm. Your legs go here before your body's ready to go with it Right, they have to um they have to sync up. Yeah, that's a sync up now. You have to talk to hey before we're like We mean we mean before they go to it being being being now. Hey man. Let's move here. Let's move here Right to talk you lose that tenth of a second. Mm-hmm. You talk to yourself. Right. You're doing instantly So do you think eventually you'll get back to automatic Well, we're gonna see yeah, I like that. Yeah. Yeah, I'd like that too It's exciting though, man. It's very exciting to see you sparring again to see all that Um, when I when you sparring are you uh sparring technically or you sparring hard like how it's fun um Um The first time I went back to fire I tried to go all out and that was just after us I'm a body with it wasn't listening Right, right, and so I had like you said I had to develop that relationship And the second time I spored that was but that was so much better. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I wasn't rushing and try to hurt nobody Kill nobody. We just trying to get work Yeah, just get working. Yeah, and how often each part of week um when we go back to spawn like spawn every day Really everything yeah, the more you do it the better it is right the more your timing is But you feel what do you thoughts on like some people think that you could spark too much and you leave too much in the gym Because you get hit too much in camp Well, that's the whole thing you learn in camp not to get hit. Mm-hmm That's the art of boxing learning not to get hit in the fight and you have to do that by trying to get in the gym Yeah, most seriously and avoiding that and then in terms of the fight So you shouldn't be in the gym saying I've been hit too much because you shouldn't get hit because that should be the objective of Fighting not to get hit as much as you believe you are What do you say to a fighter that sees themselves getting hit too much though in sparring? Do you tell them to take some time off or do you say you know know what I say? I try to teach him how not to avoid those punches and If he doesn't I don't really want to have much to do with somebody that I don't want to be involved with somebody getting hit and they get hurt and Right like that. Well, I know you were doing a lot of coaching of just even little small sessions with different fighters and yeah, there's a bunch of stuff on the internet If you have if did you think about doing that like in the future like no, no, not at this moment It just takes a really special position. They take the special person to do that You gotta be a mother father like kite dress a dietitian. It's just so many hats You have to wear and be in a trainer a good trainer true trainer to yourself in your fight This is just a lot of hats that's really overwhelming for me and my personality I totally can understand that but I would also imagine that in your mind There's some knowledge that I would love to see passed on to other fighters in a way like a trainer only a trainer can do Yeah, I'm the kind of guy you want to know from me? You gotta learn from me Just let me talk to you as something because I'm not like cuz of course we'll go Because we never get tired answering questions Some of my son asked me so I said why do you guys have something because that's the way I was for cuss You know but I'm not cuss cuss would never get he would love to answer all my questions because the cuss wanted the The perception that he knew everything you should listen to him and take his advice because he knew everything Yeah, you know, that's what it's like if you was his friend you always came to him for advice He always wanted to fight wanted to give his advice and let you know that he was a superior thinker and that you should come to him and His family a problem. That's just what he was You know, do you think everything back on your life like your life with cuss and this the story the origin story is almost like a movie It's almost no no no, let me tell you what happened man. I'm in spa fit detention for boys And my mom I lead they showed the movie the greatest it's like 77 76 from 11 you they played I lead and then I lead walked in then talk to the kittens and I saw him I saw everybody going crazy I said want to be like him and from there I go upstate New York There's a guy that used to be a professional boxer named Bobby stew it mr. Stewit taught me how to box and Eventually say I wanted to do she's he took me up stand my custom model. This is all in a couple of months since I seen that lead And now I'm trading to be a boxer crazy But it's anywhere 13 right no, it's um I would think I was 13. Yeah Look that's like a movie. It's no. I knew I was gonna be successful I knew everything was gonna go right now. I knew I knew it was in my blood I was only kid, but I say I want to be like that guy and then you started working In the search and I'm gonna listen not listen not even Not even three or four months after that. So I lead to boom boom boom boom boom. I met him. I mean one place. I had a fight Trying to stab guy and I did with a pencil or something I go from there and I go over to this bad place come on with this college That's where Bobby stewit because he's a fight and he had to take care of these all the staff their big strumming because they have to take care of these Very interesting kids, you know like um I'm a side who kid these are kids, but we're dead wild and so That's the job we're in the while we're in the bad college the lock-up college Edward and so um we have the bad remedy just to create the kid college because the lockdown No one can go outside like we they got to be handcuffed when they leave the cottage and stuff and so That's where I've I've gotten my tutelage. That's where I learned to go to school That's why I've learned everything in this bad boy place. This place where all the bad kids at and Since they had to have extreme kind of God's dear security. Mr. stew with a professional boxer And he's with teach the kids how to box the day behaved himself and got them certain level And which you can go back there and box and guys were coming back to their dome I was locked I was in the level the gold because I just got there so they put me in the back to lock you up to They um this people kind of person you also they put you in the group and I see these guys coming back with a eyes But the teeth knocked out the ribs for but they were happy that last time on this Yo, you know, yeah, man, we do what's got them and I see a what's going on in what's happening It's the only famous to still with boxing and mr. Stewart and stuff and that happy was bleeding to knock down But they were happy and it was in through the ass and I said I wanted to do that too I wanted to be tough and so mr. Stewart I talked to me. They want to teach me So I started cleaning and being real nice kids everybody I wanted to learn how to box all the kids were happy and he started teaching me how to box It's it's crazy that you met cussed to because out of all the people that you can meet no one was better at the psychological Oh, I would never been the champ if I wasn't from cussed because um he put stuff in my mind I thought thinking about myself being these people visualized myself being I don't know great or somebody I've never done that in my life I've never heard not even in the ghetto somebody say this Like that's why he's great like when I'm talking about like at home. That's why he's incredible So why is he incredible? I don't think he's that incredible. Why shouldn't you have that? Why should he have that and not you I've never heard my say that to me Because was a master at the psychological off master like you just you would hear him talk about things Just reading the things that he's written about about the psychology of fighting. He was the perfect guy for you It was almost like the stars alive. That's what I'm talking about. Yeah It's really is like a movie it really is like it all lined up and plus Physically you were so unusual you were so unusual so gifted I mean even when you know I told him that he can't be too small No, I'm just gonna know in a while he can be too short cut it's a small you got it to 25 to 30 Well, obviously they were wrong big time, but it was also you you might have been short but You you have the best style and cuss developed that with you the best style to deal with the fact that you were shorter The bobbin and the weave in the constant pressure exactly, but I believe from style is relevant I believe it's the The morale behind the style Mm-hmm. I think success and fighting in life is about desire and the will yeah How bad do you want it that we're dying for That's the true greatness is the willingness to die. So this thing worth greatness The mindset that he instilled in you and the way he gave you the tools in order to think about things in a way that That fueled that mindset. Yeah, but that doesn't do good in the real world though It's really it's really disaster Right, right now. Yeah, that's true with that too. Yeah Isn't that crazy? It's like the very thing that made you special Could fuck you in the real world Oh the real world guys like that go to prison. It'll exist in a real world. Yeah, take a model there It's great that they have to they have to remove them from the real world Those kind of people like myself isn't that what's crazy like that's where the crazy adjustment has to come in Where you have to learn how to be and that's where cannabis helped you a lot too, right? Oh man forget it But now you're not smoking any weed get rid of this fight. Do you miss it? Well I understand my discipline of this stuff But I don't like about it that is just that without cannabis. I it doesn't matter I just get mean yeah, I don't like the mean stuff I don't like I may snap out my wife on my kid. That's what I don't like right what Right, right, right, but I see the sparkle in your eye again. It's a little different right now The last time I was talking to you. There's a little more intensity going on But it's also you're ramping up. Yeah, you know, I'm just always um I sometimes um I get beside myself and I forget that um I have to use it I have to be grateful for what I love with God did in general and um Sometimes um I get caught up into my ego right so I it's just a struggle, but I'm working on it I never worked on it before so that's a start Right, right, I never could consider working on it, but that is the thing right that what gets you to be a championship level fighter Can really fuck you up on the rest of your lungs. Oh, I can't believe I'm so happy my wife is still with me I miss very grateful because I'm I'm just useless and stuff and I have to learn I have to learn how to live life. Yeah life. I'm the fastest in living life. Oh Fucking Joe. I get it man. You would never believe You know I'm using these nice words and I'm conducting myself. You come to my knife house And you would say this guy is just uncool from the end of the thought you know I just I just listened to my wife did a big deal about listening to this right so she told me become before I came in Be kind and be nice to every esp kind and nice because I don't eat most of the time I only eat after we're in if I don't eat enough She says she's gonna get angry can you please eat so she's forcing me to eat this stuff for Friday goodness and so I said okay, I eat but um she's right because of the time we've been married to 11 years Because you got a good one then man you got so many bounces you are So anyone who understands you yeah, I don't know listen. I was talking to her. You know sometimes Sometimes think about where they gather and this is gonna be over something we're gonna die once one of us gonna die before the other I'm saying I would not know what to do if you died first Wow, and I had to take care of these kids because trouble life is me and all my kids right Her life is me and I don't know how kids the two kids that we have but huh life is me and all my kids right and um I will just love her and marry her just for that alone. No pussy, no Passion, no sex that alone. Yeah Yeah, that's beautiful man. Find someone who balances you out like that Absolutely But that um what we're talking about where the very fire that gets you to be Mike Tyson that turns you into this Destroyer inside the ring Will if you don't learn how to control it. We'll fuck you up in every other aspect For instance like I have after my one round fights Some of them caused me loss because right after that. I'm you think I'm calm down. You think after 30 second the 45 second Hey, he's cool after one round everything's cool. He's happy. It's over. It's still ringing Yeah, it's revving up. It's still wrapped. It's not finished. It's not dead. The energy's not dead Not the energy is that you're jet the energy of hurting somebody continue to hit somebody. It's wrapped up Right, so the first thing you hear that indicates Authication it's not hey what bullets just off you have no control over it right You have a and there's almost like you're insane like why can I stop this why is this happening to me? Why am I in jail right now? And your Mike Tyson so it's not like anybody could tell you not to do it or anybody could tell you to shut up or calm down You're not gonna listen anybody you look fucking king of the world But it gets crazy when the people on the jail and pretty and know you real well, you know They're familiar with doing when they see you they're not excited now, hey Yeah, really familiar with you Um, Jamie Foxx gonna play you in a movie. That's gonna be interesting. That's gonna be interesting. Wow If anybody can do it Jamie Foxx can do it. That's a talented man. He's really good at what he's talented he that guy could do anything He's one of those dudes you listen to him sing you hear him play music you see him do stand-up comedy Then you see him act like this fucking guy can do anything He's just one of those dudes that can just locking on something and he can do anything You know listen when the light is on you when um When the universe puts the light on you this nothing stronger than a person who's time it's come yeah It's all about the light man. They all all of us get it You mean I think the homeless man and the corner of the blind and parallel Paralyzed-guide is begging with the cup. We all get that moment of shine. We all get it feelings Perform whatever it is we all get it No, when Jamie is playing you what is it feel me? I know Michael gy white played you once. Yeah, did you talk to him about that? No, I didn't know him anything else in jail When this guy Do you know Michael gy I met him a future great guy he could be very very nice guy I've known him for a long time and very respectful guy too, but was it weird watching someone play you Big man. I know no no no That ego shit kicks in so I'm watching it and he and he had some good qualities in that he did some really good stuff that I thought Um, but the stuff that he did that I represented me. I don't think people even picked up on it Like what kind of stuff it's the way he moved his head Yeah, people know I crack my neck Yeah, what was on about you're always doing no, um, no, it had happened when I had foot Bone cuz your Smith's head hit me and the next day I know I don't have a quick amount of stuff Great my neck was messed up, so I had to go and um the chiropractor. I don't know what the heck was wrong with it So that was a nerve so it was up from the bone crush your Smith's wife. I thought I started doing it. Oh wow I have some nerves and no Have neck problems like would you need surgery? Yeah, I said your man. You know that um, no why You remember when I used to do those rolls on my head. Yeah, the football Bridges they destroy your neck. Yeah, I would do them. This is the answer. I would do them for three minutes This stop a minute. Don't for three minutes. I do for five or six or eight rounds And it's time when all they just beat me up and hit that gave you a crazy fucking neck, though 20 inches you're neck you just started your temples and just go straight down We need a for fighting you needed good neck. Are you doing anything to strengthen your neck? Yeah, the weight stop You ever use an iron neck? Do you know what that's no? It's a halo. I'll give you one. I have one in the back It's a halo you put it on you pump it up it fits around your head and then it's got a bungee cord on it So you back up like this the bungee cord's 50 pounds and then you do these And because it doesn't do this with your neck it doesn't put pressure on the discs So it doesn't move the discs in an unnatural way with weight Yeah, because you can do all these different exercises on it But it doesn't ever bend your disc so it strengthens the neck without doing damage to your discs It's something just yeah, I would love that yeah, thank you. I really appreciate. I have um What's the name I have a a treadmill that um You have to put on some shorts first and then you zip it. It's like in the water. No, it's not water. You put on some shorts He zipped the shorts with the plastic that covers the machine and you start running and then you can run a fast You can't even feel anything Is it but it's not water inside of it? Oh, it's running the treadmill. It's under plastic It's in a zipped up around you this thing right here zero gravity treadmills. That's what it is. Yeah How's that working? You don't feel anything then you take the pants off you feel the effects the pull you might fall through the floor really yeah Really cool. So this way it doesn't fit your joints. Yeah, but listen This is what people don't understand. Yeah, you have a machine that'll be a bit of you running outside The high running outside is almost worth messing your joints up really Yeah, but what the how you get from running outside? What's the difference? You never I do I do I do run outside, but like what do you feel? Man, it's just um, I can't even articulate you can between being outside running and um It's like night and day So like then that house on the treadmill and being outside running is like night and day you can't even compare the two Is it because you're you're moving your traveling distance? Is it because you're breathing in the fresh air like the spirit you're different? It's just a spirit you're just running here in the birds here in the Whatever the animals running through breaking the sticks in the weeds, you know, it's conscious of everything Right, it's real running as opposed to just exercise on a machine exactly Yeah, even if you have a headphone on you still conscious of everything out there Now have you talked to Jamie Foxx? Yeah, well, he's getting ready to do this. I talked to Jamie. Yes, periodically All the time. Let me talk about what the film really? Yeah, we're gonna talk about it. Now he's getting bucked up too. He's getting jacked. He looks huge I just wait to finish when is this supposed to take place? Hey, whatever he's ready. I get how wow That's wild So when when he gets ready to do it, is he gonna hang out with you and try to take on your mannerisms or he's known for quite a long time So he knows my mannerism. He's not gonna If I if I died he can do me right right pretty much, you know, so he wouldn't have to be around me Do you want to help him you want to give him any pointers? What have he wants? Whatever help and what areas and what direction he needs me to help him in Yeah, that's how it's a great capable of doing it. Yeah, if you're gonna have someone play you I think he's the perfect person. He's just good and there's other guys too, but he's just He just knows the real he has been there, you know, it's hard to get a guy. It's just 20-year-old and and then we're gonna have him portrayed as a 25 and he is never get it right when somebody understands the environment that they lived in at that particular time And they create that environment again in their mind once they The under the influence of that person in portraying Jamie's gonna. Yes. I'm knocking out the park. No, you'll knock it out the park You he understands that environment and that chemistry he's gonna reen Re-reconnect now are you gonna be a consultant on this move or anything to make sure that it's all legit? Jamie will be around me. You discuss it with me. I'm sure We have that taking care of as well, but you know, we it's gonna Work this out the best way possible for both of us, I believe Now when is that is it supposed to follow you when you're a young man or is it supposed to be you as a champion? Well, we're not gonna talk about that right now. There's a bunch of stuff But you know, I really dig it I'm gonna tell you some really interesting stuff So you're saying that the running outside it's worth it just for the spiritual difference It's worth the beating up on the joints. Does it does it fuck with your joints? You have like knee problems or ankle problems these days I had to but um, but the guys I work with they take care of that right away, you know, it's almost like It's like I don't know it's like um, I Don't know I want to stay here on like I'm 18, but it's almost like putting super glue on your joints All right, you know like super glue on the stuff you're thinking like oh fuck super glue You know, now that time you put it in the stuff You can't get it off. It likes super glue. It is interesting what they can do today Like you could heal and recover way better than you ever could before There was no 54-year-old man that looked like you when we were kids No, no Jack Elaine was the only one Yeah, and even Jack Elaine, I mean he was kind of fit But he was just fit because he was disciplined because he continued to exercise But this is all about yeah, okay, how good you are and anything you don't have discipline you ain't nobody right Nothing Because you give up on the slightest struggle without discipline 100% and That has to be something that you also learn from constantly. I know Discipline I don't know a discipline. He taught me discipline and do what you hate to do, but do it like you love it Doing what you hate to do, but do it like you love it. That's that is a great quote And if you can do that you could be successful in anything. You know, you normally are You need a best janitor in the history of janitors Yeah, and I use you that for a perspective now to put in those janitors down. Yeah, you know the best of it I know what you're saying When you're when when all of a sudden done I would love it if someone sat down with you and and made maybe a book of all the things that cost taught you Now I don't know all those things that cost to me will and nowadays would not be cool, you know I don't know Cusses won in 1908 and 1908 they had a different opinion of People having opinions like women and stuff like that and because Cuss believing that he cared for the downtrodden people and this and that for the blacks and Latinos and Irish people who are being Abused by the Irish people of that time which is crazy. Um, he really um He really was that guy he was the guy to foot foot of people that That didn't have um Anyone to fight for them He was just like I he wanted to be that person He wanted to be a person that people looked up to and he was a boss and stuff He was yes, wanted to be a person and my red is book and I ran found at the bottom. He was successful his whole life He was always the guy that enabled that people came through the subtle beef and talk things over with and loan people stuff and help people out And he liked being in that position of being able to teach people something what he believed was teaching them something He knew so much about the human mind. Well, he's well when he died. This is very interesting We went died and then the commis was um That I lived with him and Camille and And she'd be going out with clean the room and when I saw this room I said all books about psychiatry in the mind and everything and mystic stuff and all that stuff And I said this is what he was really about Um, yeah, he just like he believed with mystic believers as well. He believed in then and art of Archery and all this he had those books. He was just a believer and more than what we saw Yeah, you know, it was more than what we could physically Elite articulate going on without the thing and beings or what we are called When you sit back and you think about your career and how fortunate you were to run into that guy I mean how much of that play a part in your mind like when you knocked out Trevor Burbick became the youngest ever Heavyweight champion when you think about that we did you ever stop and think like man How lucky am I that I ran into that man? No, no, he said he's coming with me. He's summoned you Well Make sense I mean you think about a man whose life work involved Psychiatry involved the mind boxing hypnosis training all these boxers Floyd Patterson how do these great fighters? And then he wants one great one before it's over No, he's not in the animal He summoned you Wouldn't that feel like for you? Does it make sense? No, I believe what he told me yeah It I mean, I don't know if I believe you could summon someone But god damn that seems like it's real. Yeah That seems like it's real. I don't know. I think you could do whatever you believe you can do If you really believe it. Yeah Well that That was what I got out of All the things that I read about you and him together and being able to talk to you about you and him is that he He gave you these tools to understand the way your mind work and you just ran with them Um, I'm an extreme kind of person. Yeah, so I get carried away If your confidence in that of And uh, a delusional perspective you have to make confidence. Yeah You get so amped up Mike You mean even even he's sitting here talking to you about these things. I could see it in you You get amped up even just talking about achieving things talking about success talking about the mind You know, I could see it inside you you get very fired up about these things Yeah, um, I have to be seriously Yeah, that intensity is what made you special. I mean that that I mean do I can't have people This is the first time I have my wife and kids around me. I'm normally this can't happen have to be away from them For camp. Yeah, yeah, no, I can tell man. You're different right now than the last time I saw you I could tell you ramping up for this fight. Yeah, it's just it's just what it is. I don't I don't know if I like being who I am It's just it's who I am. Are you planning on doing this and then seeing whether or not you're cool with it after it's over and then Maybe going back to the way you were or I just want to do it. You just want to do it Yeah, let's just do it. Only think about that for now and then let all the chips fall where they may after it's over I guess do it. I just want to do it. I like doing it. I don't think it will be the disasterism nothing this to be awesome. I'm gonna do it I'm so glad you're doing it man. There's a lot of people that had negative opinions about it and I was like listen No, this is interesting. Okay, let's think about it Hold on. We're not at all. I'm 53. I'm a year younger than you. Yeah, but listen to fact is like When they said They can't get people on the moon because they didn't want to believe it because it's like me. They don't want to believe it But what they're gonna say what happens I think there's a difference in today than there was in 20 years ago when you were dealing with a 54 year old person when it's talking When you talk about recovery when sports science what they know about how to make the body work What they know about training and conditioning people are just different now. Yeah, but it Alls have to do you could be in this is so many steroids and pills or whatever they got health roles and all that stuff But listen you could be the best physical shape me right if you don't go out there What a good mental perspective is gonna turn out to zesterous. Yeah, if you're not mentally prepared. Yeah, it's gonna be Disasterous, but that's the thing that I'm liking about talking to you. You seem very mentally prepared You're ramped up Mike. Yeah, I don't know if I am it's just that um this is who I am. I guess um I don't know I like fighting Well, that's That's why you were so fucking great at it. And that's what's so exciting about this is that you're back into that mindset again I guess oh yeah, I try to control because I have to know I have people at home. I have to use Level my personality That's the problem right the problem is Once you turn the switch on and just to keep you know, no, I'm the one. I'm in this mode. I only want a slave I don't want a family member I think that stuff down to be all have to be From a humanity perspective you get into the conquerors mindset It's just that I think everything should go my way where I'm going through this process. Yeah You know, I think no should be a foreign language for this next two months For what I need to prepare for what I need to prepare for everything should go your way Yeah, from my perspective for me know for me knowing me Prepare for what I need to prepare for you. That's an alien thought process for most people They don't understand like to be Mike Tyson to be who you were when you were at the top you have to think like that I don't think everyone there. I think you think right there You think like that I think the fight is the most extreme version of that though for you to prepare for the for your say who you were going to just say You had Joe Biden in here for you to prepare for that. That's gonna be very interesting Right you're not gonna come at him like you came as imagine you know it to come to a way You're gonna look at some of different perspective me hitting from this part and seeing this come because he's gonna look at you Just some sports jock. Yeah, so you're gonna say I'm a surprise him and come at him from this direction That's just how we think the competitive we don't know how to think What we are we want them to Have a little bit of figuring out process for what we are if I had Joe Biden in here I think I get really high before I talk to him. Oh, that would be beautiful. I think he would be high too He ain't telling me that I high guy he looks like he's a high guy He's definitely seems like he's on something Yeah, but I would get I would get really high before I talk to a dude like that Just to try to you know how sometimes when you're real high you could feel you feel energy from people good or bad you feel You know, let me have a mushroom you got him pegged yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, when you're on to mushrooms, you see who they really are behind the screen We have my wife don't like me. He's no much. She said you're a student. I don't come here with no damn shroom Shroomed and DMT no matter shroomed and What's that what's a chunga? Don't have no chunga and shroomed. I definitely know no for me at the house. Don't bring that shit home Yeah, that's funny man. Yeah, when you're just even micro dozing if you micro doze mushrooms you around people you keep Especially if someone's lined you Especially the pretending or something they're not It's after mushrooms alone before I used to do like a bag the day I would feel and then when I stopped for like Three months and I just let me do a little it I'm gonna tell him to bang I'm God and you guys are just here for my entertainment They keep watching television and friends school and then start sounding Wow, it sounds good and then boom, it's you. I know some dudes who train on it They like to train on mushrooms listen. No idea. I took some mushrooms and I did the bike for 12 but it was like Who's it's like I was in a zone But breathing heavy Wow The fucking like boom Yeah, I'm I'm living dead. It's feeling that your soul is separate from your physical body. Listen. Why can they listen? Stop it's like It's no, it's like you're in this room, right? I'm in this room And while you said that blew my mind you said I'm in the room and all the room is like it could be like the whole room this whole room is like Covered and like it kind of like Shaded Vittable and I'm just covered in the whole and it's just me and everything in the whole world is outside of me Yeah, and it's like I'm guarding everything. It's just my entertainment. I mean it's looking in And no one sees me and I'm one it's just oh man forget it I got it. Hey, baby, baby, baby, baby. I've been hiding this stuff from my baby, baby I took some shrimp and I'm feeling good baby. I'm playing. I'm sorry. I'm not feeling good. I'm feeling shit I'm not feeling good. What does your wife say what you do? He's that totally not to do that shit Stop doing it Oh Learn things when I do them know too. I learned I do I yeah, and I said see baby because when I do learn I tell my wife she said this is true. I said see This show mom is this show gives me that and light me but it's also Once I do the room something. No, I have to stop doing the show because I start doing it too much and then I lose concept of time Hmm, I might have been I just say me and my wife in the car we drop off the kid to A class that she goes once every week we drop off and we come back to the house and I you say Hey with my mom We just dropped off Mike and I lost that You know, you can't sit there. I lost that time. Yeah Yeah, it makes regular life seem like trivial so you Things like time. Yeah, they don't doesn't mean anything anymore The problem. Yeah If you have to keep appointments. Oh, no, I'm not gonna make that And if you go there and if you your body just the shrooms tell you hey you shouldn't really be here This is not worth our time. This is not what we're This is not what we're vibing on to reach the higher level. This becomes disaster You know this guy becomes the enemy now. He's stopping my enlightening me now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, shrooms uh, it's uh, I think it should I think they should be clinics some of them do in the country Cybertin was a thuba sibin So it's still a schedule one drug unfortunately in this country But I think there should be clinics with professionals. Didn't have you heard about the um the white cobra the white cobra. Yeah Oh, he's a great psychedelic too. It's another psychedelic. Oh the livid tail The synopeed Is that a yeah no The toe, the cushion or the toe the shore pea what else the jelly fish. I believe it's one and they have They have quite a few animals that Puzzeth that psychedelic chemicals. Yeah Well, we're being fucked in this country because they keep that shit from us and they make it illegal and so many people have learned great things about themselves Through mushrooms and through all kinds of different psychedelics especially microdose They learned how to stop us from drinking. Yeah, yeah, yeah From drinking by taking shrooms and LSD stuff. Yeah, it stops people from smoking cigarettes. I think um we abuse them I think you're using it since the beginning of time. We yes people like us. We abuse them. Yeah But people abuse everything they abuse cheeseburgers and alcohol It does you should be able to take whatever you want as a grown man and there's the the fact that this country keeps it from us and and keeps it illegal It's fucked up because it could benefit so many people I think well We benefit the better they wanted to benefit the people who's hiding the from us I don't want to get in benefit. I think the people that are hiding from us. They're protected pharmaceutical companies Well, I don't know who they are, but I know they're somebody. Yeah Yeah, well, there's a lot of factors. There's a lot of factors But for me personally and for a lot of people that I know they've gained great benefits from psychedelics They think about this world we live in. What do you think about how did it ever exist? How did what is the origin of it? Yeah Yeah, the world is a strange place and stranger right now because of covid and because everyone's locked down and the society's kind of fucked up And I think we as human beings what we are who we have whatever we exist to be we're fucking germs and we're the cause of everything that happens to us like I always think that people let out the virus like we're viruses We're fungus. That's what we are fungus. If we look at it from a Oh You know the perspective of consciousness. What do we do? We get sick. We get other people sick and we die Yeah Have you ever heard a Terrence McKenna? You know Terrence McKenna's no tell me about parents Terrence McKenna was a brilliant ethno botanist he was a guy that worked with plants and he was into psychedelics And he had a theory called the stone to ape theory and he believed that human beings became human beings because of psychedelics He thinks that we developed into human beings when lower hominids like ancient man was experimenting with mushrooms That could be interesting. So I think um well, let me not think that let me tell you I'm so um I thought documentaries and from the documentary It appears to be that um the world was created off of drugs someone's taking some drugs and they've reached in that That believed to be um the vine intervention from God and um this is how the world was discovered if you ever Do some research in the history of drugs. Yeah, I've definitely done some research in the history of drugs Also, I'm sure you understand. Yeah Well drugs and human beings we for sure it accelerates creativity, right? It gives people ideas But the idea behind psilocybin is a bunch of ideas one of them is that it actually Can make people think about things like language and that language could have come about From people making these connections from psilocybin it also makes people a little bit more creative Makes people horny Increases visual acuity maybe I'm compassionate. Make some compassionate Would would would bond them in terms of community and also it's better for them Yeah, I have the love and point as long as well And if you think about it for a long periods of time if that became a part of the human diet And it would make sense that now it makes it because the diet has always been abused I died as being abused now because that's why we have to be sure now, but and that's what happens with all these Yeah extreme drugs and alternative drugs we abuse them we take too much we should be smoked too much weed Well, you know, we smoked too much weed we smoked too many cities. We have to do too much of everything Yeah, we do abuse shit. Yeah, why do you think that is why do you think people do you think but don't you think that that same Abuse that same like that's also what makes people great at things to Because that same almost the same mindset that allows someone to abuse drugs or abuse gambling and become obsessed with pornography Also is the same mindset if channeled the right way that allows someone to become obsessed with boxing What's it from doing the right thing from the wrong thing with the same feeling? What's that emotional intelligence yes The majority of the world don't even put it that the world the world is not even 50 years old, right? so This is gonna be a struggle for the next hundred years. That's going to till we get that. Yeah, that's gonna have to be Our main objective to develop that yes, you know the succeed as human beings Yeah, that's no true words have ever been said. That's what it is. It's emotional intelligence Good listen, I feel that slave by emotion that I'm emotional and slave by our feelings and sometimes we Sort of placate those emotions by drowning it in food or in booze or in gambling or sex or anything that can distract you then we turn that And to memories yeah, and then we become a slave to our memories and never stops right? We that's who we are we are an alcohol We are no more than that. That's it. We come yes. We can stop from coming at just like We learned Outlaw of anonymous. Yeah, so we can learn from that So that's why they learn from that so now I was not hopeless anymore. Right That's why it's so hard for people because they have a memory of all the things they done That's wrong and they do it all the time and that becomes who they think they are So it's the change in the picture right? It's all about changing the channel, you know, right? Change that channel in life. Well, that's what's so exciting about you with this new chapter of your life You've just completely changed who you are you went from pot smoking Mike Tyson who's running Tyson ranch Was this real nice guy to hang around with doing hot boxing with Mike Tyson fun to be with everything's great and all son You shift right back into Mike Tyson the murderer again. Well, it's just that And that's it earlier today if we knew who we were we'd be very limited You know, we don't know who we are. We don't know who you don't know what you might do tomorrow when you wake up Sure, you might are you married? Yeah, we're listening you might get married again You might go crazy. Yeah, you might have a new job. Yeah, well, that's one of the exciting things about life Right, I mean this has to be exciting time for you to make this big switch Yeah, think about that too, but I think about a lot I think about like you know, I'm 54 and then I'm not gonna be here much longer When I go and my go see my wife and kids again the friends that I love throw my life. I'm gonna see them again. I start thinking about that Yeah, you know, you know when we think about it. I would disguise This guy's book what is it every one be the way from internal our internal journey I have some guys in me that book and I said why this is pretty cool because it's true We're only one heartbeat away from dying. Yeah, and going on that long ride of not knowing. Yeah, I'm feeling Because that's when I was on the told DMT is all about feeling. Yeah, the field makes the reality How much of that change your perspective on life when you had those experience of You got me in shape. We got me this this way. This was a happy deal So some of that did it the first time I did it. It just blew my mind then I did it again It's hey you better get in shape. Let's get in shape. Let's get the fuck wrong with you Yeah, listen I like it. I Told you hey, you're fucking yeah, especially when you think about yeah, I'm not the guy you have to say Mike man You know you can a few pounds. Let's kind of work it out man. You can do it. Hey big fat dumb nigga I look you big fat mother you a fat lady motherfucker that What about me you need to hear that and you need to tell to yourself. Yeah, no anybody the right person need to tell it to me too The fuck's gonna say that they do hey hey I was I listen I was I was somewhere around Freddy. I went somewhere Mm-hmm to do something that I saw if one of Freddy Roach's trainers I was guy European guy and he knew me for years because I used to work with he said what the fuck He's wrong with you look at you man. This is not fucking right look at all Mike. What the fuck are you doing and wow? I felt this big but he said around bunch of people but you know this is not right. This is not right That's a fuck Right and I'm I got right. Yeah Some people call that fat shaming but I think fat shaming works for me works for me too I want somebody else to mind now you know that me and I found out he that's and he thought that was a fat More fucking he wouldn't tell my one be a friend of my one If he's not tell me your Mike man, it's not right man. At least let me know I might not want to do but let me know Yeah, I'm not looking good. It shouldn't write. Yeah, you know, because the guy can go tell you Hang around that you stay eating and fucking hanging around drinking. Yeah, that's the enemy man. Yeah, that's the enemy So you do the DMT trip and then you have it in your head like I got a jet in shape Absolutely Like sometimes you say like body shaming doesn't hurt people hurt some people to me it makes me hey Man, let me it helps me that's the kind of that guy The only way it hurts people is if you don't listen If someone says you're fat and then it hurts your feelings, but you don't work out then it hurts you But if someone says you're fat and it hurts your feelings and you say I'm gonna use this as a motivator You're actually a bad shape then it helps you exactly fat shaming is only bad if you don't stop Yeah, I never looked at it fat shaming Like when you just what you said like who's gonna say at the mic like I don't respect that guy. Yeah The guy that thinks like that. I'm not gonna tell him. Oh, I'm that's my enemy right. He's not helping you He's my enemy right. He's my enemy. So the DMT trip open your eyes to that. Yeah, absolutely Yeah, but that's not something you want to do on your camp, you know, I did a 16 times Yeah, everything 16 times yeah, never regret doing it Never regret doing I think everybody should do it. It's just Everybody but everybody wants to yeah, yeah, for everybody not everybody Everybody who needs it should do it. I should say that yeah because some people believe this is all this is the real world Yeah, they really believe this is the reality Is not interesting like once you do it you realize that that world is somewhere vivid than this world and We're gonna be in that world longer than we're gonna be in this world How about there? Let me rip and die get this shit. Oh, yeah, that's probably true I don't know what it is, but it's probably true, but this will listen. This is what happened you do this to stuff or any of those um interesting narcotics You have a different opinion about dying and the fear of dying yeah, you know, you say you thought the thing Hey, maybe I'm living too long You know shit. Well, maybe that's just another existence That's that's what what made me think like maybe this is always there and maybe this life that we have that this temporary life We're cleaning on to that so I'm why don't why why why is it even a guy that he's why nobody wants to really Stick on to the fact that after we die is over. Why nobody want to hold on to that Yeah, the same way it's that more it's then really being confident with saying hey, there's something else after this And that's from scameless from dying the early or what you know Why do people stick with that and that's a smooth and that's a soft and I ride to the internal life of darkness or what it might be I mean, we don't know until we die, right? Yeah But the everybody think the people to think that it's just over when you die. It's over you the world Darkness and then that's it that might be right Or it might be that you go to that place where you go when you smoke DMT Maybe that that might be you don't remember when you were born do you? You know, you know, I got a memory you died. Yeah, I think we're born again if we're born again And I can remember the life we had no remember this shit. Oh, I've always said everybody's scared to die, but no one's scared to sleep You know sleep. It's no weird. Some people are yeah, some people are afraid to sleep You know they get their moments with some time you think way I might not wake up this morning You you're hearing you know people your school sleep. I have been a nice time with you then doing these drugs in the air throwing wake up That's true, too But the thing about sleep is you're pretty confident you're gonna come back so you're willing to shut off It's okay, but no one wants to shut off forever, but I'm listening the belief that you're gonna come back is magnificent Yeah, the belief to know that we're gonna wake up in the morning magic. We went into life like that. Yeah, with that belief. Yeah And you think life is just temporary and Then when it's over you're gonna go to it even more magnificent place Well, we say life what life when we that's not life is not over right when we leave this place right It's another form of life. We haven't experienced yet, right Even if it's the black life where it's just all darkness is a part of life that we have to embrace in some kind of form of fashion Well, that's the weird thing about the toad right is that there's no visions But the but the feeling so intense you see yeah, right? Yeah feeling so intense even make up or whatever you see if from that's why feeling The song point we have to understand the Feeling the eye we have to understand the even lie to us right our eyes lie to us I remember the first thing I felt is so insignificant Like you're just a part of everything you're part of the whole universe and instead of looking at yourself as a center of the universe When I did it, I just made me realize like no, you're part of this infinite thing and such a small part Everyone is such a small part The universe itself is what's big and you're just a piece of it We all just feed each other Yeah, we're all your feet me to that blood Just running to each other feed to the whole the dirt the mud everything the water the ocean the air We just all feed in each other. Yeah, the bugs. There's more listening There's more starting in the space and there are greens of sand in the desert. Yeah, imagine that Through decals What do you think about aliens Mike? I think we're aliens. You think so. I think we're descendants of aliens. Yeah Yeah, that's the only thing I could come up you can't explain if you can only tell me about Adam And Eve I'm gonna go with the aliens Hmm if that's what you hit me with Adam and Eve. Yeah, I'm gonna go with these alien guys Well, there's a lot of people that believe that we're the product of aliens that aliens came down and did some experience Experiments with lower hominids and did some accelerated genetic experiments and created people well listen Aliens of listen when With certain tribes the people I'm not saying saying I cut um Caucasian when they came to Africa Even before that when people came to other people the first time they seen them. They were aliens. Yeah, first time um An Asian man saw a Caucasian and I was the alien a black man saw a Asian man a white man. That was the alien. Yep Um Maybe they want aliens, but that what they thought they were there was just a tribe of people that encountered them and perhaps they were getting extinct They were dying and they had to um Read through just the low or whatever you were saying lower hominids lower hominids And maybe that this is us because they they had certain um as you may know because I know you know you do these kind of researchers They already discovered there was um there were different forms of species that that's working down to us That they came from us and now we're at the degree of I guess where the human species is right? Yeah, there was a bunch of different kinds of humans. Yeah, yeah, there was many many different kinds of humans and before they were here Many of the years before many of the years After we were erectus After we walked they always been here is very rare that you can find a A human life that didn't wasn't erectus they could find a skeleton of one that walked in our thoughts The oldest person they found is 4 million 4 million years old Lucy. I believe it is um 4.4 million years old is nothing It's nothing in terms of people were people were erected then people were walking on both feet then Yeah, you know for you for years For me years ago, so it never found I don't believe they ever found the Skeleton of a human that wasn't erectus That's one of the things about life Life is so short Oh, it turns out that goes well Everything goes well you live a hundred years, but that is nothing in in terms of the life of the planet You know how long it took me to build the great world of China? Thousands years two thousand years. Yeah 2000 years Can you imagine that and that's nothing 2000 years is Left think what crisis has been around crisis young, you know young crisis You know young here in terms of the world. Yeah Yeah That's how how bad they wanted to keep the Mongols out they built the fucking wall took them thousands of years You ever read about gingers con? listen um His real name is team is in yeah, and he um Let me tell you what happened he like 13 when he died around 13 what 14 oh he He's real rain was like in the 12s in the early 1300s and First of all he came from he's real poor his mother's father. They all came to got beat up and took it out He had a woman then they took his wife, but he got friendly with a real bad mother of real He was a criminal, but he was the baddest from all he was so bad, and he loved Timidon he just became you know how some guy you see a guy near to the old one guy was he was really weak at the time And this other gang had took his wife And he and the similar guy was making my mind reading stuff and he was just said what is wrong? Because the guy really loved them. He said what is wrong? He said these people took my wife He said don't worry. I got many of what who you worry about that one way but I really loved that because he really loved And so the guy said listen, I'm gonna help you get your wife back But you'll ever tell nobody that we rated this city because of a woman, okay? And so he went back and the guy got his wife back and so the guy and I Teamed into being number two because he loved him so much But he got jealous because the men started Favouring gingers because gingers were letting raid everything said keep it all He wasn't taking that keep it all let the men have it all and they all started Looking up to my father him and then the other guy got jealous and eventually gingers had to kill him But he said he wanted gingers that wanted to but he said you have to kill me And so gingers killed him, but you want to go? And he said I'm you're not gonna spill any blood. He crushed them in the rocks For he wants big no blood no cuts and nothing like that But that was his best friend and after he died that's how gingers had the reputation So you followed them you pay attention to him you you read about you I named my dog after his favorite wife Paley. Oh wow So I know you've been into that kind of shit like Alexander the great All the all the different conquerors guys Pippin Chalamane Clovis Now is this stuff that you just studied because you wanted to study conquerors is just interest you I wanted to study that mindset You know and I found that the greatest conquerors They ever lived um The farmers You know farmers she produce Some might have we weren't think that's important and stuff and then as they became great through that They may be a birth to great children who were born with greatness like Alexander the great and stuff Like Philip the Macedonian that whole bloodline about like that They were all kings, but they were very small and nothing to forget until um It was always one Alexander before him that was Pretty great and forgives the Persians, but eventually they lost and they pretty much kissed the Persians ask You know, I mean Persians put them in the position of power until um Philip of Philip Macedonia came who had the nickname aka Philip the barbarian And he wanted the gold cross in and slave all the Persians and everybody after that the world and Alexander the great Mother who was a really interesting woman um I'm trying to say Albanians maybe and they had a different kind of um Study and worship and stuff back then so he got caught up in that his family didn't like her for that but um she arranged for She arranged for Alexander's father. I think to be killed for Alexander Have the power to her kick that the power she could lead to her kids while he was on campaigns, right and um When he was on these campaigns now that his father was going he just Concord everything but when he ran into the afghanian people he fell in love with them He wanted to interbreed with him. He wanted to create a new race of afghan He is madly fell in love with him and that's pretty much why his His family is not the same but the Greeks Went um what they went mountain they mutiny on him because they were jealous that they were given big positions to the The Persians and no afghanistan. He loved him. He even quote the afghanistan is the most beautiful people the world God must have loved them one and anybody. He made them beautiful He really fell in love with them. When did you start getting really into like conquerors when you start? You're 15. Yeah, what would introduce you to it? Um, I was at the table eat with cousin a friend of mine named Craig was at a Statement which he was wrong, but it sounds really good to make me investigate He said Alexander the great at his time was like six five So at six five three hundred years before Christ that was a giant which was wrong here very small The arm was too big for me. It's really small guy He wasn't big at all And so just died alone him saying that got you interested. Yeah, I wanted to talk with the monks He's a massive guy, but I found that he's just a small man average guy You know, he's not a mack monks at all Not a big man at all, but you got interested in the the mindset of the conquerors. Yeah Well, listen, this is what I want to know Why would one person think that he could fucking on the whole world one person? Why would he have that mind who would think like that? Right. Why would a man person? Why would that's not a fucking person That's just something When your ego's just got so out of whack. Yeah, well, you just curious can't think rational How do you think like that in your a nice person? It was a guy before him a couple hundred years before him named Cyrus the great He was just like he was a conqueror, but he was a conqueror for liberty He wanted to conquer all the slaves and let them go conquer all slave masters let them go He got killed for that too, but can you know who that maybe that sounds that sounds cool too, right? That's good. That's a good thing But listen think about it. Who the fuck is he to take somebody else's property take somebody else's stuff because he believes is wrong Which it probably is wrong. I think it's wrong. But who the fuck is he right who is this guy to take other This is conquer you you don't bother nobody But this is what they did back then and you're killing everybody back then it was really legal It's almost in the Bible's in the books It's not I won't say but it's in books slavery's in the books in the religious book that we need slaves And he did just and this guy's gonna say hey no more slaves He 500 BC so he's gonna say no more slaves No more slavery is wrong out through the whole world So he wants to conquer the world and free of slaves. Wow. So that's just a different mindset. Yeah, they're different kinds of mindsets Yeah, he's conquerors has Who do you think he is who the hell is he? He has this little town only high-gold cove of the whole world his town is right here Well, let forget his town his country is right here. Yeah You know And he don't even he even conquered his country and now he's gonna conquer the world and liberate freedom make freedom What kind of guy now that's nothing if that's not somebody on drugs you don't you tell me No, you tell me not be honest. That's not so high. You tell me it could be coke no I'm a free everybody right this is the one of 500 BC. This is slavery is what it is this is the way in the world No, I'm a free all the slaves It's pretty crazy What what did you get out of like reading about their mindset like studying Timbergen studying Alexander the Great like what did you get out of reading their about their mindsets um I found out that the greatest ones the best the most polytic ones Well, all mama's boys really yeah, it's greater than mother Wow, and polian Alexander You know me wow Genghis Khan to yeah really yeah What do you what do you think that is huh? What do you think that's all about highly respect their mother I'm gonna think it's weird. Um, I think their mothers were the first especially Alexander the Great I think she was the first stage mother. I think they were from before her too You know Clear patch it was what that's just what the word at the end of the day They were wanted to lead through their sons on the authority to something like that. Oh, okay Like like that parent that takes their kids to athletic events and screams and cheers and pumps them up and No, no, no, no, it's the parent who Who's child is law and I want to be able to have that word Mm-hmm, okay, do you get that yeah my son is the king right this country a couple of countries But I want I want my thought to be in his mind come out of his mouth Do you think the parents convinced the child that they were that special that they should run the world? Some of them do but as some kids get older like I've been the great I've been the terrible They get older and then they realize these people weren't right to me Not and he's not killing his sponsors or the people that would rip it step parents and stuff You know some of the kings did it too, you know So when when you were studying this when you were coming up as a boxer and you're studying all these conquerors You were trying to understand their mindsets. Yeah, and you were trying to apply that to your own life Pretty much. Yeah, did you get anything out of it? Yeah, yeah What did what did you get like what how did it apply to your own life? Well at the end of the day the allex God for forgiveness all of it So when you read all these books about all these conquerors when you're a young man and you're on your way to become in the youngest ever heavyweight champion And you you're trying to take on the mindset of the conquerors and you find out they all has God for forgiveness. Yeah, how did that affect you That was pretty cool Because by that I learned greatness was the willingness to die But you know doing research and on these particular individuals and that's what they were willing to do for greatness Hmm and you you know you heard about Achilles and stuff. He said he what did he want a short life of Of greatness in this a long life of obscurity. Yeah, we took the short life and that's what I'll examine it When When you when you study these people and you You you take that conquerors mindset Did you get anything out of that? Did you apply that into your own your own pursuit as a champion? Absolutely because you have to listen Alexander the Great was 32 and he conquered the known world. Yeah, and 10 years And so thinking about that as a as a young man. Absolutely. I want um I want my pre-eminence to variable the time that that you know into 10th of time. It's not rain with it I think everybody should want that that are competitive in the art of um What do you say in mortality? Yeah And I search for it. That's what he wanted. He wanted he wanted in mortality That's what he wanted he wanted to be known since you know Till the end of time. Did you ever think that maybe you were born in the wrong time that maybe if you were born in the times of Alexander the Great you would also be a conqueror no, I am a conqueror now because I've conquered myself and my demons You know not because I'm at that time. I'm never born till I'm born in the right time Most of them couldn't conquer their demons That's why they actually forgiven us from God all of them because just like um The gentleman um that discovered um um Um, I'll call it anonymous, you know He um he inspired maybe he maybe he had a problem with I'll call that then but he how many people have he inspired? Yeah, that is so much bigger than him succeeding and not with his problem You know, what's interesting about him is he Was interested in LSD. There will think yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was a big thing of his That's what that's what instructed him to have the program. Yeah, develop the program. Yeah When you're talking about they all Would seek forgiveness from God That's it's so interesting to me that you turned to cannabis and cannabis will allow you to forgive yourself Yeah, I'm listening to reason why they ask for forgiveness for God. This is why this is interesting that you said that It's because they believe they were God and they had that the end of the day Realizing check themselves, but they're not yeah, they're not God and then they've done horrific things. Oh, yeah At the end of his life he was so forgiven and giving everything away and so sorry for every bang He didn't know how to forgive himself either He didn't know how do you do that when you think you go? How do you forgive yourself? So at the end of the day he said look the man who conquered the world died with nothing in his hand He gave everything we had no swathed nothing He was so freaked out about dying being the rich guy and stuff and having so much property and having the world like he Possessed because he had the world. This is gentleman that he well, Eugeneius Scott the guy that they named sloth after Then was sloth Eugeneius I don't know, but he was like he's considered a homeless bum Nowadays they would be called above my homeless guy whatever and Alexander didn't watch in him This is our keen he is he's watched this guy for years And he said listen before he became king of Greece he's watched this guy This is when he went to king and he said hey listen I watch you and I have everything And I'm gonna have been you don't have nothing so what can I do to you to make you happy and know what he said I mean he had to both to say He said first of all you can be kind enough to move out the way of the sun And then allowed me to enjoy my day And he couldn't have conceived somebody to turn him down for riches and stuff He couldn't have conceived of it. It just blew his mind. He was so blown away He couldn't even kill a guy for disrespecting him. He was just blown away He said this I have everything, you know, and he realized he wasn't happy. He had it all He's the king he didn't even know where he was getting ready to go He's made it be king of the world, but he's the king of Greece and he's just not happy And he has everything so he thinks by conquering the world is gonna make him happy and he did and he what happened He turned into a drug Imagine that it's crazy. He ran that's why he experienced a new drug. He listen when um when you went on a campaign Know what I thought I thought when you went on a campaign the movie is live They said you go on a campaign to jitter bruh 300 Gladys or what a 10,000 so you know they bring their whole family with them. It's like a party They've wived their kids everything they got the um Surveyes are with them Housebuilders are with them the people who deal with um agriculture for that time Everything's with them wine. Even for the good test everything when they conquer Conqueror you know what conquerant is We think that's glorious. Conquerant is glory. No, I could know I did conquer is rob and rape it illegally Taking somebody else's goods and enslaving them. That's conquerant. That's not good people All the people we like we say these guys this guy conquer this he conquered that they hurt people They did it for greed. They didn't do it for we're gonna help our people. They did it to take things because they could Now when you were coming up as a fighter and you were reading all these things about conquerors You you were fueling your mind in that way and you were also studying a lot of fights You studied all the old school champions. Are you doing that now in this resurgence like are you studying? No, I think I know everything about them. I mean, I did the research at them I was a kid so I started reading to the I started going to the other level So I go from the level of these guys that are fighters the gladiators all those guys So I go to from them to the generals and from the generals to the gods In that but that occupied a lot of your time when you were training right? Absolutely Yeah, but that what are you doing now like that? There's anything that's similar that you did like when you were watching those old school tapes If you were watching like jack Dempsey or or a Harry Grab or any of these old school fighters That was there was something about that that was providing you the Inspiration you were you were you were learning from it But it was also you're getting yourself into this mindset. Yeah, because I know if I was like these They cuz will tell you the more you the more you win the more you beat these guys the more the people applaud and not the more you enjoy doing it And I wanted the people one of them people that um Have the same feeling towards me that I had towards The older fighters of yesterday. Yeah So I was madly in love with fighters. I was just and if I met a fighter Hardly was just hey cool let's get this kid out of there. We just bug them to death When we carry your back and help you this guy do this. Yeah, you know, you think they were gonna like you for being a Hey, you get this fucking get away Your dope is yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, carry your back and help you with this But you not you don't um study films like that anymore now You know what I do Sometimes look at that YouTube. I look at you. It's been there have fight Limitchenko. I'm checking my I'm checking my self. I may see some raid robs some woolly pep stuff Yeah, I'm gonna check this out Limitchenko's a wild guy to watch isn't he? He's really um He's really nice to watch. He's really interesting, right? Yeah, like watching the footwork so extraordinary Doing that I think watching you know, I people hate on them. You know, that's how it is You know, he got the light when you got the light. They got after you. Yep. Who else gets you excited? That's uh fighting today I got a couple of guys. Haney good the guys you're good. I was a little guy from Baltimore. It's good It's quite a few and they have a couple of guys um That's under them. That's pretty good. That's in that that's gonna come up and be really good with them I was spence is really good turns Crawford turns Crawford is good. There's a bunch of good fighters The little guy Ryan Garcia. Yeah, he's a hot shit Nasty left hook though And all the fighters now they often they really into each other's face talking. They really friends you can see but they talking shit Yeah, I'm saying I'm an insecure. I've been a punty right in the face. They might think I'm a punk. Let me do that to me And these guys are friends. It looks so cool. Yeah What do you think of the heavyweight division now there's all right Josh was there's all this and everybody's good for that time. I don't think they're bummed anything like that Everybody's I want to have something negative to say about somebody right you know This is their time they're the best of their time. You got to give them that credit. You can't compete with guys with a path A guy's are coming up now. This is just their time. This is what it is right now. Yeah This is right now. This is how we're gonna judge it from right here What do you think of it? It's an interesting group at the very top of the heap right Tyson Fjury Deonte Wilder Anthony Joshua I mean, it's a interesting group at the at the top level right now No, it's not interesting. They're all exciting fighters. Yeah, they're all gonna make a great deal of money If they just need to fight each other. Yeah, stop pushing. It's all fight each other fight each other a couple of times Yeah, and then when this stuff is over your guys could say hey listen. We did it our way right, you know, this is what happened to me I'm such an ego maniac. I fell in love that night. This is gonna last and I'm the king forever. I'm always gonna be the king This is where it is fuck you. I never think about tomorrow. Nothing. This is now. I'm the king Just get my fucking ring And And the fact that I know this is what I didn't listen because cuz it's a hey It's always really don't take this person. I took fighting personal Cuz they don't take it personal. It's not personal. Right. I took it personal. The ego make me take it personal So when he said don't take it personal. What did he mean by that? Don't allow it to stop you from living your life in a happy perspective I lost the fight. Don't commit suicide. Stop drinking and doing cocaine Stuff fucking girls and I'm rubbing that you don't know you meant to me Don't do this thing when you lose the fight. Like okay I'm doing anything you lose the fight you shake the guy thing you go to the gym you work hard of prepare for the fight You put you win the fight you don't win the fight you prepare hard to wait for the next fight You win the fight you don't get the fight fight the mother guys you win the fight them fight them again The name of the game that you stay busy you keep working how much different with things would have been if custodial Yes, really different, but it wasn't meant for that to be yeah, I had to refill I had to figure this stuff out He couldn't protect me my whole life, right You know, I've always wondered I was wondered what would have been different if he had stayed alive So mean he he guided you in such an amazing way, you know, and you Cuz of just listen Cuz it's a hard guy to get along with Cust was just Enemy prone if he didn't have an enemy he would create one really one of those guys. He loved fighting He wants to fight if he doesn't fight you doesn't want to live wow wants to fight you need to have somebody to fight If he doesn't have somebody to fight here find somebody to fight he must a lot of having you as a pupil Oh, well, I listen to everything he said I listen to him out of the man I mean, he'd love people to listen to him I took him say everything he said I would do if he told me to kill somebody I would kill somebody You know anything he said I did it Do you think about him even today while you're training Absolutely, I think my every all the time, you know, I mean, I think about it all the time Wish he could some of my kids. I wish he could have probably seen you know Why did I did and how my kids turned out now? Yeah, you know, I went to great schools and they did cool things and they just kids and they really They just really sweet kids that really don't understand life yet and maybe because they didn't have a Father like I had yeah things are different than it was for me You don't want your kids fighting No, no, I did that. That's why I did for didn't have to yeah, I remember you were talking about your son Hit in pads and like him possibly fighting like man. You don't want to fight an animal like me Yes, people I'm nothing to lose and all the the whole dream is about if I beat this guy I'll get that new bike. Yeah, I might get this car. That's how it was cuz say if you win this tournament I'm gonna get you this you win this tournament. I get you your gold teeth. I will try to save my money up for my gold teeth And if I win this tournament, you win this tournament. I'll get your gold teeth Everything everything he always um dangled a car. Yeah, yeah, you win this tournament But I didn't win a tournament and get shit You know I don't go for so happy to you anyway, though. I don't get it. Yeah Well, listen Mike. I'm very excited about your comeback. I am as well. I'm very happy that you doing it I'm happy you look fantastic It was really cool to be able to sit down talk to you about it and I'm a hundred percent enthusiastic about it I look forward to seeing you there. I'm sure some people be there and we're working out I would try to be their life. I would love to be their life if it's possible if I can be there I'm just gonna love this shit. I'm excited. I'm excited I'm excited looking at you being fit and how enthusiastic you are and I wish you nothing but the best brother Thank you very much. Same with you man. You're gonna be successful doing you. Thank you. Barcaz here, man. Nice brother. Shit. Who would you want to interview? I don't I don't I don't have anybody in my head that I need to interview You want to do Bill Clinton and one of those guys? I'd like to do Bill Clinton. I like to get high with Bill Clinton He had a brother named Roger. He just heard it's an awesome guy. Yeah Yeah, so Roger before ever friend town of Roger. It's just a beautiful person Yeah, I but I don't need to you know, I would if he wanted to do it, I would do it, but I don't need to I like talking to everybody man. Yeah, I like talking to my friends. I like talking to you. I like talking to anybody Yeah, and you know what I did a couple of times I talked to some homeless people and they're really interesting Yeah, I think sometimes I think I'm near and I'm gonna be I'm overwhelmed them intellectually and I get Humboldt sometimes Well a lot of homeless people are really smart. They just fucked up there whatever part of your head that That's what we keep together. I mean, you know, I think I know you know This guy's out dirty and teeth fell out and this guy started enlightening me on shendon He has to tell me to leave when I'm stuck there Tell me man, I get out of here. Are you enjoying doing hot boxing? Hey listen, I haven't done it in a while since this stuff since you started training Yeah, and That's cool too. That's cool too I don't think I'm a good host why I'm under this kind of duration to understand. Yeah No, like I said, I could see the intensity you're you ramped up right now. You're a different person the last time I talked to you Yeah, I guess but excited It's exciting. Some of my wife folks you shouldn't have told me again that treadmill Really she doesn't believe you predicted it man. You predicted it on this show. You said I don't want to reignite my ego And you did it I'm excited that you did it. I'm excited. I can't wait for November 28th man. I used bunch of man listen God man, I've been working. I'm gonna show you when I leave here then okay, all right show me. Yeah, thank you Thank you brother. Thank you very much sir. Thank you. Bye everybody.  Boom. So we're talking about losing eyesight. Yes. You actually take comfort in the fact that your eyesight is starting to dwindle. You want to chase it. At first I was like, I'm fine. Then I'm 42. Then it's like, let's try some ones. Then it's one, two, five, then it's one, five. Win it now. I stop because I have so many fucking glasses. Some of them are ones. Some of them are two, five. It's like, it's like, uh, you know what I mean? Yeah, I do know what you mean. But what I appreciate is you know where you're at by what you're able to retain if you fight for it and the things that are going no matter what you do. Now I've heard there's some Israeli guy who's got this app, probably from Laird, that this app and you do it and you get your eyesight back. And sometimes it's about, I don't need to try to use something to hold on to everything. I want to pick the five or seven things that I definitely want to hold on to. And I want to watch the rest of it go in and out with the tides. I agree with that in some ways, but if there was a real thing where you could get your eyesight back, I would definitely be on that. Well, I don't think there's a lot of risks. I use this. That's not real. The problem. Well, Lasex, but I know people have problems. You can get it if you have problems with your vision, but we have macular degeneration that's coming from age, age-related, macular degeneration. Lasex doesn't really fix that. But I know people who are wearing glasses and then got Lasex and they don't wear glasses anymore. Yes, that's a fact. But we never wore glasses. They get one eye to close up and one eye for distance. It's even more fun. Half the eye on the stands I've gotten and wind up fucking me two weeks later, like these don't work. Yeah. What about the loss of a sense that you were accustomed to being fine? The noise you. What about it? Yeah. I like being able to see things. Read labels in particular. How many of these fuckers are supposed to take? You know, and what's in here? Yes. How many milligrams? What's in, what does that say? Also, it's also funny to go up to a little luchron pad and have to go. Like that to me, it's just a gas. Really? Interesting. Except the things you cannot change. Now, if someone comes in and says, Joe, Bob, I got it. We're done. Come over here. It's easy or it's a supplement or do this for two weeks or stop doing this, this, and this. Then there's a trade-off. Yes. Well, I'm down for anything that actually works to make your eyesight come back. But I have heard of nothing. Everybody that I've heard of. This might be our project then. Because you care and I don't. So we have a nice balance. There's a guy named David Sinclair that I talked to. He's a professor at Harvard. Is it MIT or the fuck is he? Harvard. He's, they're doing some work with people that have serious eye diseases and serious injuries. And they're actually injecting some form of bacteria that has been encoded with some miracle cure for degeneration. And they can detach retinas, fix things, and. Incredible. Yeah. So they're working on some stuff. Yeah. So maybe in the future. You want to have two's and ones and 1.5's and. Yeah, what am I going to do? I will. I have a lighted to greener pastures. I'm sure there's going to be other issues and hurdles that you're going to go eyesight. I don't know for a time now. We have a real shit going on here. Yeah, I'm sure too. I'm concerned about that. Do you that thing that you're wearing around your neck? Yes. Being as you are obviously known as being iron man. Are you concerned with wearing a large thing in the exact same spot? No, it was the. Did you ever think of that? Life is funny because I was doing this before I ever got fitted for the RT. So it was more of art imitating oddball stuff I was doing anyway. Oh, really? Yeah. Oh. Well, what iron man, this is even more interesting because maybe you were born to be iron man because iron man obviously had that from the comic books. Lucy prearranged destiny. And what's incredible is how far afield you can go from it and still find your way back. Yeah. Well, there's been the whole superhero genre thing. It's so interesting to me because there's so many reboots and there's so many like how many fucking spider man's have they've been? How many hawks have they been? Yep. There's only one iron man though. You got that. Thus far. What you're sparking the fuck out of here. You're iron man, man. So it's like there's certain dudes just own a role. And if anybody else tried to be iron man, we'd be like, Well, interestingly enough, East Coaster, a dad of some renowned, very different. My dad was a kind of a underground filmmaker. Autor Maverick, I grew up definitely being Bob Downey's senior's kid. It spent time on Long Island, which is I think where Tony was raised. Yeah. But when when Stan Lee was really thinking that through, he was the Vietnam era and he was thinking about the military industrial complex. He was thinking about how about if I can throw a little bit of not politics in here, but karma. And he gets trapped know by the own thing and it becomes, you know. So, uh, and then of course, there was the whole demon in the bottle. I think he was the first superhero whoever like had that, you know, almost like, hang up his jersey because he was hammered. Yeah. So I mean, yeah, there was obviously, but again, once something goes your way, you can draw all the parallels you want. You can call it destiny. But it was, it was something that I definitely felt drawn to and I definitely fought for. And looking back on it, I go, why was I fighting for that? Because it turned out to be a pretty special thing. Well, it was an amazing thing. I mean, you embodied it in a very strange way. I mean, it's inexorable at this point. You, you know, which is why I thought it was cool that you're going to do Dr. Doolittle. Because I love the fact, I'm like, I'm a fan of your work. You've done a lot of great stuff. Like what? And you, you doing Dr. Doolittle is like a cool, it's, I want to say you're not taking yourself seriously, but you're taking a risk. Trust that I'm not. Yeah. But you're taking, I mean, this is a fun kids movie about a guy who talks to animals. Yeah. You know, I mean, that's a great break for because like, if you're Iron Man, like there's certain people that for whatever reason become a role and that is it. That's what we will accept. You are that guy and you're not doing that. You're, you're, you're able to through your talent and through your ability to take chances. You're able to be a bunch of different things as well as be the Iron Man. Yeah, I mean, don't we, I don't know. If I'm noticing anything now, it's that it's that we need to shift and we need new challenges. And just like MMA and society and politics, things are moving and morphing and the information age is making things so everything's learning and growing from everything so quickly and improving or disproving or discounting whatever's happening next. But for me, I heard that this was on the table. My miss is who's my creative partner and all things said Steve Gagan. I was like, I know Steve Gagan, Suryana. Really? What did he do? He wrote, wow, I like that's a big turn for him. Yeah. And then I said, but why do I want to and I looked out and we live on a, on a, on a rescue farm? We have really? Al Pacas and goats and Kunikuni pigs and you know, it's just crazy. And I was like, okay, same way I did with Iron Man a little bit. I was like, I'll write there's something here. And then before I signed on, I was just googling like weirdest Welsh doctor. I just wanted to think of, I don't want to just do another English accent. So there's this guy, William Price, who's a nutty Welsh doctor. He was a neo-druidist. He was someone who believed like we could communicate with all nature and all that stuff. So I sent a picture of this wild looking guy wearing like a suit, the stars on it and like a staff in his hand. I sent that to Gagan and he goes, that looks right to me. I was like, great, let's do this movie. And literally that's that. It's always it, you know what I mean? It's always that thing of you click and you go, here's my, here's, here's my sense. What do you think? And then the other, the guy says, yeah, let's lean into that. And then you go, but do this and that. Hey, will you give me some of this? And you go, yeah, I'm all of a sudden you're in a synergy. It's like a good interview, like a good fight, like a good dinner. It just comes the gentleman right there. That's a crazy look. Yeah, to me, I just thought that can do little bit like that. He goes, does he have to be that way the whole way through? I go, no, no, when they find him, he's a recluse. And then the animals like clean him up and then he looks less unhanceomer, where he less, less weird for the kids for the rest of the movie. But let's find him like that. This concept of things just sort of falling into place. I'm a big believer in that too. Yeah. What is that though? Is that you getting out of your own way? Like, what is that? Is it, isn't that 70% of it? Yeah. Yeah, I say it's 70% maintenance of what can I do to do my part to stay out of the way. And then the other part, I always think of it as like this little super thin, invisible thread. But you can feel the tug and you just kind of, you have to be really gentle when you have to pause, when agitated, and you have to go for it when you're like, there's four walls in here, which one has the map behind it. You, it's that one. And you knock down the wall and it's there, you know? Yeah, what is that though? That's a synchronicity intuition. But labeling it is very dangerous because it's so filled with woo. So it's, you know, there's so many people that are hucksters that have like made a career out of sort of like labeling it and defining it or teaching you how to get to it. It's great because it's the commodity that you can't capitalize on. And yet if you don't show proof of its existence, you can't even, you shouldn't even be qualified to speak on it. I don't know. Right. It's the big I don't know. But when it happens, whether it happens with love or with friendship or with a career or with a path you're taking, you just know while there's a smile, there's an inner smile, like yeah, this is it. Well, but I found it. This is it. I'm supposed to be doing this. Here we go. Here we go. Yeah. And I really feel it's so funny at this point in my life and being, you know, kind of middle-aged and all that. Well, I know I'm going to fly around the world. I'm going to sell some soap. And I know I have a new project and I know I've just retired my jersey on this 12-year journey I've been on. And how do I want to start? And it came up. How would you like to go? Yes, that's exactly what I'm going to do. I'm going to go have the Joe Rogan experience and kick off this year and this season and this new chapter by doing what I love, which is an interview as we're looking at each other and there's a give and take. Is the door to Iron Man totally closed? Because I don't believe it is. Oh. You guys can go through time now. You can go, there's there's, you know, you're already open up that door. Let me ask you the question. If I picked the jersey back up and put it on, wouldn't you feel a little bit like, no crap. No, here's what I think. They go through a few semi-lack cluster Avengers movies without you. Ready for this? I'm ready. Here's a scene. There's a moment where the world's fate is at stake and they realize they need a super genius. And then they figure out how to restart that time machine. Great. Come on, man. Is that you? The audience sees you when you step out of that thing. Is this your, and can we, you want a little arc on it? Two. Because if this is your idea, then you got to show up for it too. I'll do it. I'll show up. What do I have to do? I don't know. I'll do whatever I have to do. We all have to do whatever can. I'll hold the thing. I'll hold the thing. I'm sorry. Does that, do they still have that? They do. They do. It's digital. I'll hold that digital thing. I'll do it. But the way people would freak out if you came back. Come on. Think about it. Take a few years off. Now a few Dr. Do Little's, a couple more Sherlock Holmes. You know, it's interesting watching Eddie Murphy in this last little period of time. And I was talking to Colin Jost last night who got to sit next to him at the Golden Globes and who was there. On the show and writing for him with him. When he hosted recently and he'd go, it's just incredible. Our culture never encourages taking a break. Never encourages saying, don't chase that thing because you've got it in your hands. And I love the idea that if you're good at what you do, then it's not about time. It's about it doesn't matter when you decide to pick up the mantle again. It's just about. But it's scary, isn't it? Could you imagine? Like if they just say, hey Joe, just don't do the show for four years. And then come back and do it again. You'd be like, get us out of the lifetime. Who knows what's going to happen? Well, with Eddie, what's interesting is he was arguably the greatest of his era and just stopped. Just stopped for 30 years and no one does that. No one is who's that good. And then when you see him, I don't know if you ever saw him, he received some award and he was on a panel and sitting in front of podium rather. And he was talking about Bill Cosby and he was doing this routine about them taking away Bill Cosby's awards. Oh, God. And it was fucking brilliant. And the timing was so good. And all of us comics were just sitting there going, he could do it tomorrow. He could just get out there tomorrow and he'd be fucking murdering. Yes. And but it would be different. It'd be different. He's a different human. You know, this one of the more interesting things about it. It's him talking about some of the more homophobic stuff that he did in the past. Now it makes him cringe and you just can't believe he was that person. But he, you know, he was, when he did delirious, I think he was like 22 or something crazy like that. Which is just bonkers. So he was that good. Anyway, I've been thinking about him lately in relation to a bunch of things, but also just that particularly nowadays, giving yourself permission to not have to jump because, you know, strike the iron's hot. All that stuff. And maybe it's just as a bit of an anxiety to the times, which I remember too, speaking of past generations. I remember grown up in 1974, Nixon's black and white TV getting impeached. My dad and his buddies are whooping it up, but they're still pissed and I'm going like, wow, it's not worse or better. It's different, but now it's on us. So there's the bit of urgency. And that whole thing of just being able to say, like so to answer your question, to me, starting up again is off the table. I feel I've done all I could with that character. There'd have to be a super compelling argument in a series of events that made it obvious to it. But the other thing is, I want to do other stuff. Right, of course. Yeah, of course. Yeah, what you're talking about about Nixon and people get it. People can lose themselves in current events. And what I mean by that, like, it doesn't necessarily completely, your life is more than what's going on in Washington. You know, Hunter Thompson talked about that when he was running for sheriff in Aspen. He was talking about how local politics, like your neighborhood, that's real. This actually can affect your life. Like, what's going on in Washington? How much does that affect your day-to-day existence? It's very little. But for some people, it becomes an enormous portion of the real state of their mind. It takes over most of their day-to-day consciousness, where they're consumed with it. And it becomes a thing they're cheering for, or they're rooting against. And then, you know, your life revolves on something that you have very little power over. Teams, turf wars, interests, think globally, act locally. Yes, it's a beautiful statement. Really is. It's one of those cliches that you don't even think about. I didn't know that was Hunter in that picture out there. It's me who looked like Joe Walsh. Good as he could sleep in Joe Walsh. I mean, he moved to Colorado, too. Oh, wow. Yeah, the Rocky Mountain Way. Damn, if he didn't. Yeah. He once told me, I'll speak out of school, he said, now he, you should just watch TV for a year, bro. Thanks, Joe. And by the way, he was probably right. Probably right. Look, if you just hung back and just did nothing but watch TV for a year, the fucking ideas you would have, you'd have, you'd have, you'd probably have a really rock solid idea of what's going on. His was more trying to have enough things going on that I wouldn't have any ideas for a year. And then I give myself a break for a year. Maybe that's good, too. See, I'm thinking differently. I'm thinking like, analyze the landscape. I think Joe Walsh is one of the most underrated guys ever, because he changed the fucking Eagles. The Eagles were one thing. Yep. And then Joe Walsh came around like victim of love. That's Joe Walsh. Yeah. He came around and just, and all of a sudden there was a rock to it. It's like they were kicking down doors and lighting shit on fire. It was different. Yeah. There was an edge to it, you know? He's, he added crazy. He added crazy to this beautiful harmony. And I love it when the guys that added crazy go up to the thin veil between dimensions and say, I think I'm going to stay put. Yeah. And then all of a sudden they represent stability. They represent being okay, hanging up your guns. Yeah. And just being, you know, free. That's everything. Everyone has to accept that at some point in time, right? I mean, maybe that's you and your glasses, right? Yeah. Because everyone has to accept that at one point in time. You're going to have to get off the ride. But when you're doing great and you're kicking it like boxers are a perfect example. They always last too long. There's only been a small handful. Like Andre Ward, recently, marvelous Marvin Hagler in his prime, they just go, that's it. I'm done. And they actually are done. Almost every one of them comes back and almost every one of them chases that dragon. Here's why I love you. You're making an argument for and also the argument against me coming back and doing another. Yeah. Listen, I'm not married to anything except my wife. But I'm not married to any ideas. All the ideas that I have are just like, hmm, maybe that idea sucks. I love you as Iron Man. So I would, if they opened up this time machine and you popped out, I just imagine the moment where everybody goes fucking crazy, it would be amazing. It could be great. I would love that. But I would also love you hanging it up. Yeah. It's, look, it's just, first of all, it's 2020. And I'm not an OCD guy, but I keep thinking, see clearly. See clearly, even if your vision is going. And it's difficult because by, I feel like we all just get buffeted by feelings and ego or fears or little, you know, chips of resentments or intuitions that are tied to something maybe higher, but you think is out of your reach or whatever. So it was a perfect time. And I got to go have dinner with a bunch of the Marvel folks last night. And kind of have just a little bit of extra closure because, you know, the movie came out and it was bananas and the directors are sending me pictures of people flipping out in theaters when Tony snaps. And I was like, whoa, this is kind of like a really big cultural thing. But then like Victoria Alonzo, who's the head of VFX for all these movies, a literal super genius or Kevin Feige or Favreau or Scarlet or some people that I've just been there with it for a long time. We were there experiencing it all when it came out. And then we see each other on a red carpet and it's not intimate. And then we kind of hadn't really had a chance just to do nothing, just hang out and, you know, have some crudite and kind of talk shit. So it was really interesting being here today because yesterday was this kind of last night, was this kind of real like closing the circle on things a bit. That's got to be bittersweet. Yeah. But I like that you want to move on. And I like that you want to, and I like that you're doing something like Dr. Doodle. Because that's like, you've done a lot of wild shit in your life. You've got a lot of wild shit in your career. But you sort of embody every new chapter with the same kind of energy, although there's a different result and a different piece of art. It's all the same you. And that's one of the more interesting things about people. And particular actors because actors get to be a bunch of different things. And it's one of the weirder things about that craft. Like when you see a guy who's like Daniel De Lewis, who like embodies these different humans, like literally becomes different humans. It's, but it's always Daniel De Lewis. You know what I mean? Like even though he plays these, these, you know, that there will be blood guy and all these different psychopaths and various fascinating characters, it's always the energy like you're, you're pumped to see him do it. Right? And I think that's, I feel the same way with you. It's like, I know there's, you're an interesting guy. There's a lot of shit going on in your head. So when you dive into something, whatever it is, whether it's your character from Tropic Thunder or whatever it is, like you're, you're gonna, it's gonna be Robert Downey Jr. dive in into something. So I would imagine it would be kind of annoying, even though you are brilliant at Iron Man to stay Iron Man. Yeah. Well, fortunately, I don't have to find out. Right? It's, it's just interesting too. You know, life is doing something and, and, you know, I met at this place. It's also, it, it baffles me confidence. What is, what does it really mean? There was a period of time where I felt like I did, I did the first Iron Man and then I went did Tropic Thunder and then I was doing the first Sherlock and I had my shirt off and I was doing martial arts. I was like, I was all over the place and it just felt like I was, I was hitting triples no matter what I did. And, and then people are like, are you really as confident as you seem? And I was like, I guess right now I am, yeah. And then, and I think this goes, I mean, this reminds me, we were just talking about the, McGregor cowboy fight coming up, you know, it's like, it's, you're gonna go to that? I'm gonna watch it. I can not watch it, you know? To brilliant, uh, souls who cannot lose, neither one of them can afford to lose this fight. Wow, that is a matchup. Yeah, particularly, cowboy doesn't want to lose. Heck no, but there's this guy who's the, the, the poster child, the guy who's the, the, the one, right, the chosen one, that's Connor. And then there's cowboy who's like, I think I can fuck that guy up. The journeyman. Yeah, yeah. So confidence, you know, there's been times when I felt I'm in possession of it. And then you want to let go a little bit because it's only ever the moment and life guiding you. The wind is so at your back that you're like, wow, are you just, are you just, you know, jumping over the waves and all that by yourself? And you're like, you bet I am. But there's a physics to the moment, man moment, machine, whatever. And the winds at your back. And then the wind does what the fucking windows and it changes. And if you're left there thinking what, you know, so I think it's great to be in full possession of what you would call supreme confidence. And then see what happens if you don't hold on to it so hard because it's great. But it is a bit of an illusion because like everything else, it's always changing. And every day the reset button, the spacebar gets pressed and it's like, now what? Yeah. The reset button. Yeah. That you kind of have to have a confidence to jump into some of the roles that you've taken. No, but I see what you're saying. Like that you don't want to hold on to it. Because it can come go. I remember Warren Beatty who I learned so many amazing things from a student movie called The Pickup Artist with Molly Ringwald. I remember that movie. Okay. And he was kind of the de facto producer of it, uncredited. And he taught me a lot about just acting and what it was. And he said, he said, what's your action in this scene? And I was like, oh no, he's asking me. I was like, my action. I'm picking up girls. He goes, what's your action in this scene? And I was like, I'm driving a car. And he asked me like, you know that things sometimes, I'm going to ask you a question and just you get caught flat foot and you go, no, your action is you're trying to go to work, but you're getting distracted by this addiction you have to try to get laid. So your action is you're trying to get to work. And I was like, oh yeah, he's right. And he said, always know what your action is because then when you come in in the morning, confident or when you come in in the morning, you can't hit your ass with both hands. You know what to do. So to me, one of the great lessons I learned from him was, oh yeah, just boil down what it is you're doing, whether there's a camera around or just what am I doing today? Today I'm showing up and I'm trying to be honest and also to listen and learn. But really my action today is I'm beginning a process of promotion. Warren Bates is another guy who learned how to put his guns down. Yeah, it's like I remember watching that Madonna movie. Remember when he was dating Madonna? Uh, a treat or dare. Yeah. And uh, he's hanging around with her. You know, she's in the throes of fame and everything and he's like, what the fuck is going on here? And he's like, he's never seen it. Yeah, but he's an older gentleman now, you know, he's the best. And you know, he's hanging out with her and just shaking his head. And you know, that kind of marked it for me. Or Warren Bates just realized, all right, let me step away real quick. If I had to talk to him, one thing I would ask him is, what was it like when Carly Simon writes a song about you? That's got to be a trip. I so many. I mean, we should, if you, we should do a whole session just about things I learned from Warren Bates. Yeah, I'm telling you. I would imagine. He's a brilliant guy. Clearly. Do you think that you could do Tropic Thunder today? Would that be possible? Or you could do it. And again, like Eddie, you know, I look back to me. That movie to me was a circle back to my dad's movie called Putty Swope, which I highly recommend anyone who hasn't seen to see about a black guy who takes over an added agency in the 60s because everyone votes for him when the head of the company dies because they think no one else will. And it's about what happens when someone who is free spirited takes over and essentially corrupt endeavor. And then he realizes and confronts his own corruption. But I remember I was probably two or three when that was being shot and when it came out and it was so a part of my upbringing. And I just remembered some of the folks that were around my dad at that time. And so when Ben called and said, hey, I'm doing this thing. And you know, I think maybe Sean Penn had passed on. Possibly wisely. And I thought, yeah, I'll do that. And I'll do that after Iron Man. Then I started thinking this is a terrible point. We take way too many. And I thought, well, hold on, dude, get real here. Where is your heart? And my heart is A, I get to, I get to be black for a summer in my mind. So there's something in it for me. The other thing is I get to hold up to nature the insane self-involved hypocrisy of artists and what they think they're allowed to do on occasion. Just my opinion. And also Ben, who is a masterful artist and director. Probably the closest thing to a Charlie Chaplin that I've experienced in my lifetime. He writes, he directs, he acts. If you had seen him when he was directing this movie, you would have been like, I'm watching David Lee and I'm watching Chaplin, I'm watching Coppola. He knew exactly what the vision for this was. He executed it. It was impossible to not have it be an offensive nightmare of a movie. And 90% of my black friends are like, dude, that was great. What about the other 10%? You know, I can't disagree with them, but I know where my heart was. And I think that it's never an excuse to do something that is out of place and not of its time. But to me, it was just putting a, it was a blasting cap on. And by the way, I think white chicks came out pretty soon after that. I was like, I love that. I was like, that was great. So, you know, well, it might be the last time we see that. Unless things change, it seems like no one can real, I don't think you could do black face anymore. We almost lost the Prime Minister at Canada because he did brown face. He pretended to be Saudi Arabian, right? He did Arabian nights in high school or something like that. It's, it's an interesting and necessary meditation on where is the pendulum? Why is the pendulum right? Yeah. Where is the pendulum maybe cutting a little into what could be perceived as as heart in the right place, openness of its time. But again, I mean, you know, there's a morality clause here on this planet. And it's a big price to pay. And I think having a moral psychology is job one. So, sometimes you just got to go, yeah, you know, I effed up. Again, not in my defense, but Tropic Thunder was about how wrong that is. Yes. So, I take exception. No, it's, I think you could do it today. I think you could. I think it could be done today. There would be so much outrage, but there would also be people cheering. And if you, if we got, we boiled down all the bullshit and got to the actual result of what the film did, it's fucking hilarious. To this, I watched it again about a year and a half ago. It's a great movie. It's a great fun movie. I mean, it's ridiculous over the top, hilarious. And it worked. And your portrayal, I mean, it wasn't, it wasn't egregious. It wasn't, it was, it was necessary. It made sense. All of it fit. It all, the square pegs and square holes. I was just thinking square pegs. I don't know why I was thinking, oh, it was thinking about Sarah Jessica Parker on the ride over here. Isn't that crazy? I think I drove by, is that that Warner park near here? Oh, yeah, yeah. I think she went to school over there when she was doing her show. Anyway, interesting. Yeah, it worked. And, but it was, it might be the last time we'll ever see a studio take a chance on a guy wearing a black face and the prolific use of the word retard. Those are two things. And by the way, that's a Ben, the funny thing too was all the heat got deflected to Ben and simple jack. Yeah. That's what people were pissed off about and I go, great. But you never know when it's going to be your time in the barrel. You know, sometimes, sometimes life just says, you know what? And I've been on both sides at that coin. Sometimes life just says, you're a symbol now. Did you have anybody that was telling you not to do it? Whether it was agents or anyone was like, My mother was horrified. Really? Bobby, I am telling you, I have a bad feeling about this. I was like, yeah, me too, mom. But anyway, how are we? First headset, first headset, where they put the makeup on you. How are you sweating? There's been a couple times. I was all the night before and we were on Kauai. And I was like, well, here we go. And I was just running. I think I had six lines that day. But I knew that there was going to be choppers. There was going to be a squib fire. There was going to be choreography. There was going to be, you know, it was going to be cacophonous. And the only thing that mattered to me, again, what's my action? My action is an actor in this movie is to know what I'm doing. Even if what I'm doing is insane. So I ran those six or eight lines. I had a thousand times, lying in bed over and over and over and over and over and over and over again. So the next day, I was free to enjoy myself and not be struggling to wonder what it was I was supposed to be doing. And then that's what it is. It was just, you know, it was one little mosaic after the next. And by the end of it, I had some pride that AI had made it through. Forget that it was, you know, a blackface. It was special effects makeup day after day after day after day after day after day after day except for the times when I would have my bleached hair and blue contacts in my eyes or, you know, other characters. And it was just a, it was a piece of work I was doing. And I cared about doing it as professionally and as honestly as I could. So when you memorize lines, that's an interesting thing. You said that you were free to, to do it. Like when you memorize lines, is there ever a part like when you're acting where you have to think like, okay, what am I supposed to say next? And how much does that get in the way? This, I look, I have a very broad band of, of tolerances. I don't care if the people I'm with happen to not know what they're doing or don't know their lines or stepping on my lines or, or whatever, or want to change their lines and my lines. And it's always a different thing. It's like reading the room. It's like, you know, if I was a fighter, you go into the octagon and there they go, you ready? You ready and you go, and then you just do it. You go in. But so I've had it where I would try to be off book before everyone else. I would get it down to an acronym. So if there was a thousand words I had to remember, I would just remember the first letter of each and I would put it on a piece of poster board. And then I would stand away from it, not as far as you and your, your archery setup over there. But far enough away to where I can see it, but kind of can't see it. Back when my vision was a little more clear. And I would just run it and run it and run it. When I did the first Sherlock, we were rewriting it so much. And I would have pages and pages of stuff. I was like, give me a near-week and it helped me with my accent. And then I started getting into like, you know what's so great? I can finish work, go home, hang out with my kids or do whatever I want to do, go train. And in the morning, they can change it all they want. I don't have to trip if it all, if you know, unless it's some monologue that you want to really be committed to, that's not going to shift. I've just got like that. So you'd put one of those little earpieces in and they would feed you the lot. Yeah. Yeah. And now I've kind of gone as far as you can go with that and I'll probably go back to new method or a new version of the old method. So it's basically improvisational. Like you in the moment, like you decide with whatever preparation you're going to do for each role, how you're going to do it, whether you're going to go and memorize everything obsessively, or whether you're just going to be a little bit more loose and free with it. Yes, depends on the script too. Like, Tropic Thunder, Justin Thoreau wrote that script with Ben. Yes, really good script. I mean, my missus, who next to my mother, you know, with probably more so, is the opinion I was really waiting on. And she was reading in the kitchen laughing her ass off. She goes, this is so wrong. This is so wrong. And she goes, and it's so true. If you do this right, you're doing something that's, it's about a bunch of self-involved idiots somehow or other becoming heroes. And she goes, I love that. If that's what it stays, then it's going to be good. And so, like for instance, the, you know, never go. Yeah, full of love. You don't want to say it. No. By the way, I guarantee you, I'm getting out of here. My stock is not plummeting when I leave here. I'm not smoking dope. I'm not doing a musk. I'm going to do everything right. My stock went up the next day. All right. Drop six went up nine with you. I don't know. I don't understand it. I love that you know. Now it's a piece of art. Yeah. With six percent in the smoke. God bless this heart. Yeah, it just changes. It just changes. And I also know that I don't really know that much. And it's different every time anyway. But some, I really like when you have a loose concept of what you're doing. There's certain parts that aren't going to change much. And the rest you discover. So the first Iron Man. I mean, John and I and the, and the writers or John and I, we were just, we'd write, you write a line. And then we would, we were literally watching the puppies be born as we did it. Frustrating for people who not Gwyneth because she can look at a piece of paper and then go, okay, I got it. And she's got it all memorized. She's amazing. But what's for the highest good? Sometimes it's very self-indulgent to come in and like, you know, hand out new pages or say, oh, I'm not saying that. So feed me that. You know what I mean? You need an environment of respect. But I like, I like discovering things. How much of acting is managing those weird relationships that you have with these other people that you're acting with? Like you, you've made some references to like people changing other people's lines and not being prepared. I got out of acting for that very, that was the thing that I, I went from a world of stand-up comedy, which are just a bunch of crazy people to actors, which are a bunch of crazy people, but in a different way. Yep. And the managing all the different characters and all the different personalities, how hard is that? That seems like that could really get in a way. Well, yes, sure can. And it's like a thumbprint. Every time you're on a new project, it's a completely different, you know, fingerprint. You never know what you're going to get. And sometimes projects seem blessed. And sometimes you could say they're cursed. But again, my Susan Downey Esquire was talking about this yesterday. She goes, it's the only thing you can't overcome as a creative producer on a big movie or anything is. In principle, no matter what happens, you can fix it. We lost the light of the thunder. The weather came in. Okay, he got sick. Oh, she's pregnant. Okay, great. It changed the costume. You can't overcome personalities. Yeah, the relationships that people have with each other. Do you meet up before you commit to a role? Do you ever say like, I want to meet Captain America. I'm fine with the fuck that guys really like. By the way, I mean, I love that you think I'd have the authority. Did you cast this guy? All right, let me get a taste of it. I'll tell you if he can stick around. I'm really interested in doing that. But can we all have a group dinner or something like that? I'm going to meet these guys. My, my MO is always, let's mind meld. Let's get together. Let's work weekends. Let's spend time together because you can't replace that familiarity. But so you have to try to build it. And sometimes it happens very naturally, like I adore Chris Evans. I can't even tell you why. He's a Boston guy. He's technically an at such a brilliant actor, but he also doesn't take himself seriously. He's flaky, but he's the first guy you would want to have your back if something went down. He's, and yet we're different enough where I feel like by being who we are and then both having those characters, we were able to, I think, I thought Civil War was a special moment in the arc of the Marvel films about turning one against the other and what it meant. So sometimes you just get lucky. As a matter of fact, the whole Marvel universe, possibly without exception, just happens to be a really well, what do you call that when you put together something curated, group of souls? Well, it's interesting because people take superhero movies seriously now. Like now superhero movies are films that happen to be about superheroes. Whereas, you know, for the longest time, superhero movies were bullshit. You know, the TV shows were kind of clunky. There were campy. You know, it was Batman with the silly pants on and Robin and... I bought it. Everything was banged. Boom bang. Remember, you'd see the big boom from his screen. Absolutely. And yet, who was in the first Superman? Brandon. Yes, right. So there was always a seed of an attempt to legitimize something that was otherwise too dimensional. The Superman was probably the first film that really did that, right? And then Batman. Yeah. Then the Batman series. But again, how many goddamn Batman's have they been? Right. I want to see what Pattinson does. Oh, that's right. He's going to be Batman now. I like that guy. We've... How many Spider-Man's have they been? That's the most, right? Three. Only three? Yeah. And three Hawks, right? At least. One, two, three. Not counting the TV show. Yeah. Counting the TV show. Four. Counting the TV show. Oh, you're right. Eric Nana. You're right. Yeah. Norton. Yep. Mark. Mark Ruffalo. Who I think is... He's my favorite. Oh, he was just born for it. Yeah, it's perfect. Yeah. You believe him. Yeah. And again, his whole thing was what's my action is like, you know what? I... I got an anger problem. How do you guys manage this giant CGI thing? Like, how does that work? Like, when you're on the set, that seems like one of the weirdest parts about acting in some of those Avenger films is how much of it is actually digital. Yeah, you just kind of get used to it. All digress. I did a movie with Richard Linklater called A Scanner Darkly. And it was rotoscoped. So... Great fucking movie. I love that movie. Love him. And Keanu and I and Woody and Winona, and it was this cool thing. And we would shoot these scenes and he would say, you can just leave your buddy Mike on the outside because there's paint on the whole thing. So, that rotoscoping is a great metaphor for essentially what the Marvel movies became when sometimes you would even go and I'm supposed to come in and like, you know, throw something in the... It was off camera, but everything else was great. Oh, we'll just move your arm later. And you go, wow. So you never want to rest on your laurels and say, you know, but after a certain while, I was like, why am I wearing this? This football suit just put some dots on my shoulders so I can move more freely. And then be like, all right, I go to honestly, what are you really using this, all this stuff I'm wearing for it? I go for reference. I go great. So I'll wear it for one take and then I'll take it off and I'll relax a little bit. But then other people would be like, or a bettany would be like, I'm stuck in this fucking thing, you know, paint it purple. So everybody got to join in on the joys and the miseries of the technical challenge of doing it. And speaking of Ruffalo, by the end, because he's smart Hulk, he literally they're just making him big wherever he was. And they put a little, you know, a piece of PVC with a big Hulk head up about five feet over where his head was. And he was just there in a green suit. So in a tracking suit with like his package out, you know. And he'd be like, can I... Let me just at least tie like a little so wrong around my... Come on guys, whatever, you know. And so I think Mark went about as far out into the ionosphere of FCG as you can. I didn't get the whole smart Hulk thing. I didn't get how he figured that out. It wasn't really. Yeah. Hulk is supposed to be Hulk. Right. It's supposed to be the altar. It's like one you can control. One is one of the genius scientists. Exactly. What is the beast? But after so many times, and again, this is the genius of the people who break and shake stories over there, fiking his team as they go, oh, he's Hulk and he's not Hulk. He's Hulk. It's a big battle. Oh, he's so conflicted. What if he could meet himself in the middle? And then what corner have we painted ourselves in by having him meet himself in the middle? Because then you can't... If that doesn't work, you can't go back to the way it was. You've done it or you can go back to the way it was. So I just think that the real genius of the Marvel creative team is they... and the Russo Brothers who did the last few Avengers Infinity War and Endgame is they go, we love writing ourselves into a corner. We love it. Because then it activates all of those. How do we get out of purgatory juices and then you get the next right idea? Now, when you guys sit down and when you first receive a script for one of these things, do they consult with you? Do they discuss this with you? Do they just lay it out and say, this is the character arc. How do you feel about this? What do you think? Yeah, and it's changed over time. I think if you're one of the folks who has their standalone movies, like Scarlett has Black Widow coming out, I think you take a... I would. You take a bit of a different tack in how much meaning... I think the phrase, the legal phrase for actors and studios is meaningful consultation, not script approval, because then anybody could hold a studio hostage, because I don't approve this $30 million that you're trying to spend right now. So your schedule's fine. When you say, I don't approve, I picture a bathrobe and I picture fine china and tea cups. That's a picture I don't approve and then just storming off. I've had my moments too, because I'm so passionate about story. But again, after more seat time with the same people and new people coming in and getting a pretty brutal education on what kind of process these movies require, you just start trusting more that they're thinking on your behalf. And also, little things are easy to change. Big things become an inconvenience to the higher good. And at what point do you want to pull the air break on something where the trains are leaving the station? Well, I would imagine it would be a fine line. They want the actor to be comfortable with the character and they want some... and maybe some feedback would do beneficial. But they're also... they have a path, a vision that they've created. They would like to see you somehow or another, at least morph slightly to get on this path. Yeah. Yeah. And by the way, after I had my second round of kids with Susan, I became both artistically, I had a bit of a renaissance when I was doing the third Iron Man. And then after that too, I was like, well, now I'm going to do this Avengers and there's so many moving parts and it's so difficult just to get all these schedules to coincide and get everyone together, then I'm not going to be like, I'm not feeling it. So again, it's that thing. It's sometimes... What do they say? A faster or a low and further together? Sometimes you can only think about further because you got to get down field. Other times, you're thinking, hey, this is my moment to run and I need a little help and a little approval and any little leeway, but that's any creative endeavor. I would imagine when you're involved in something that's so epic, when it's actually over, it probably almost seems surreal because the production is so massive, there's so many moving pieces, there's so many special effects, so many things that you have to sort of visualize while you're doing it. And then after it's all over, you're done. And what is a big Avengers movie? How many months are you involved in this? Well, I mean, it could be some part of 18 months to two years, depending on how far out you are, and then four to six months of principal photography, and that additional photography, and then post, and then I always include promotion, you know, from... Yeah. From soup to nuts, I think, is the phrase... Soup to nuts? Yeah, that's a Jules Silver phrase, one of my great friends and probably one of the greatest big movie producers of all time. We did the Sherlocks with him, we did the Matrix series, my Mrs. was running his company for 10 years, Kisqis Bang Bang, which is, I think, in some ways, the best film I've ever done, wound up being a calling card, it came out and it bombed, but John Favreau saw it, and he said, this guy could do it action movie. And so that wound up being my calling card into the Marvel Universe. But to answer the question, it can be anti-climactic, like anything. I mean, this is surreal, you know? I've never... maybe seen you around a little bit, but I feel like I know you, because I see you all the time, and I listen to you, and I'm a martial arts nut. And... Yeah, isn't it? Sometimes when you get outside of the fortunate, interesting, creative experience you're having, you kind of go like, it's very dreamlike. Yeah. Yeah, my whole life's a dream. Yeah. There's that for the ramifications, the ramifications. That's for real. When those come back, a bite in the ass, you're like, yikes, this is a fucking dream at all. This is dangerous. Yeah, I used to... I remember the first time I met Phil Hartman, I was stunned that I was actually like sitting at... we were at a stable read, sitting across from, and I'm like, how the fuck... you're a famous guy. Like, you're a really famous guy. I've seen you in movies, man. Yeah. You've seen you on television. Here you are, right there. How weird. You know, and it seems... it's very hard to be normal. And then after a while, that becomes normal. And then the fact that it becomes normal becomes surreal. And then it really feels like a dream. Like, when I meet people like, we've just met an hour or so ago. Yet instantly, I feel like I know you. Yeah. Yeah, it's very strange. But also, you're not full of shit. You know, when someone's not full of shit, it's pretty easy to get to know them. You say something, I say something, back, go, I know how he works. I see what's going on in there. This is an actual human. Here we go. We're talking. There's a good litmus, too, because you watch your show pretty quickly. And I just love it, too, because in your show, you literally, you just... you start... it's a rolling start with you every time. You come into the show and you're already kind of thinking about stuff. So it feels very organic. And part of me, even this morning, was like, I hope he looks into my eyes and doesn't see a complete and utter foolish fron. Because I would probably believe him if he mere that back to me. Oh, no, that's a danger, right? Yeah. If you respect someone and they think you're a fucking idiot, you're like, oh no, I might really be a fucking idiot. But there's been times when in just being myself, someone who I respect, as looked at me and said, what are we talking about? Yeah. What do you even say? For sure. And you remember that, because it kind of... Yeah. It stiff arms you. But part of those are good, because it realized, well, you were probably off on a fucking stupid tangent. And that's part of being a person. You know, part of being a person is like, I don't know what the next word out of my mouth is going to be right now. No one ever does. Unless you do, and if you do, it's kind of weird. Some people are poker players. I respect some people that are that, because there's an ability to... Maybe it's fear-based. But I always appreciate people who... You know, those people like their icons or big shots or that they hold a certain steam and all of their texts are very simple. It's like, yes. Yes, we should fix that. Sure. Yeah, sure is my favorite. Sure. Okay, on it. Yeah. Yeah, no periods either. You don't have time to make a period. It beats the all caps, texts. Yeah, I don't like those all. Those people weird. Although CT Fletcher, he sends me all text. Okay. I love him. But he's shouting at everything. Everything is a shout. Yeah. But yeah, the surreal part is, I think part of the reason I'm still so interested, not just in life, but also, you know, getting to do what I do, is I'm a fan. I love movies. I love creativity. I love music. I love culture. And the fact that I actually have a place in it while I'm observing it and digging it is like, it's... it's... it's an honor. Well, that's a beautiful perspective. And that shows in how you... how you carry yourself and it shows in the work that you do, that you do appreciate it. You know, one of the saddest things is someone who's in an amazing position who doesn't appreciate it. And that drives other people crazy too. Like, Premadana's drive people crazy for a variety of reasons. But one of the big ones is you don't appreciate how fortunate you are. Like, and people love when people appreciate good fortune and appreciate a well-earned position and are, you know, engrossed in a beautiful life of something that they really enjoy and something that really inspires them. Well, I need to be kept right-sized because I can easily fall into self-seeking and depression and self-pity and judgment and all that stuff. It's kind of a... it's a bit of a default, but I spend enough energy and I've had enough help over enough years to actually just say, oh, that's just awful, destructive behavior. You're entertaining in your head, you know. Bad patterns, just bad thought patterns. Yeah. Yeah. I think we could all fall into those. I'm ruthlessly self-critical. For me, sometimes it's very hard to step outside and just take a pause and recognize that not everything's going to be right the first time you try it. I think that a lot of people that are really graded things, it's one of the things about them is that they're not very satisfied with their work. Like, they're always looking to improve it. They're always looking for it to be better and then that can start that cycle in their head of self-loathing and anxiety and anger at their performance or their work or whatever it is. And then that can lead to depression and that can lead to just self-hate. Yeah. And what are your tolerances? Like, I'll be the first to tell you, like, you know, do certain movies or movie doing Tropic Thunder or one of the first Iron Man movies I was like, I'll go over to the monitor, I'd be like, play that back again. That was so good. Do let me see that again. I need confirmation. Yeah. Because it's always a miracle. You stayed in frame. You got the line right. Your eye line was right. The lighting was right. The sensibility was right. And you just look at it and you go, oh, you know, it's like, I don't know. For me, it's like the playback of the perfect Superman punch KO and just go show me that again. Yeah. Or when we were shooting Tropic Thunder, I had a little teaser clip for Iron Man, but it wasn't coming out until the next year and we were going to go to Comic Con. And so I got to see it and show it to people and they're like, oh, I think that's that movie's going to do pretty good. And then when we went to Comic Con, we saw it. But it used to be like that with music too. Like I write music. I haven't for some time, but you would write something and then you just listen to it on the loop because you go, wow, that's not. I know that I was here and I did that, but it feels kind of inspired. Yeah. And you want to get all that stuff. But yeah, self-critical is important as long as it doesn't bleed out into and over the edges and just make everyone archer miserable. Right. Again, get out of your own way. Again, I mean, that's one of the many tenants of life. Learn how to get out of your own way with everything, including with creative endeavors. It seems like that thing that you said about music, most people who write things or create things say that. They know they're doing it. Like, if you make a great sculpture, you know you're doing it. But where is it coming from? Like, what is what is the idea that manifests itself into this perfect thing that you can step back and look at? And it seems surreal that how did I create that? Did I? I don't know if I did. I mean, I definitely made my fingers move, but I don't know if that's me. Who wrote that music? Who performed it? I know you did, but there's a thing inside you that sort of like tunes in to this this energy of ideas. And then it comes through you. And again, you kind of have to get out of your own way while you're writing something. And then when it comes out, it's a weird feeling. It's not like, like, if you hammer a nail into a board, you fucking are very aware you did that. You're very aware. But there's something about the creative process that's not you're not totally there. It's weird. Yeah, because it is you and it isn't. Yeah. Right. And it was you. Even me. And I love it. You always hear it too. And sports, it's like, you know, oh, you know, uh, you know, how to go to day, Federer? Oh, I was out of my mind. I was not in my mind. It was a beautiful day. And I think you saw the results. Yeah. You know, sure. Yeah. Effortless, poetic. Well, fighters talk about that all the time that like, especially a counter shot, like they land something and they don't even have any idea they're going to do it and they did it. And then it caused the knockout. It's their training manifest itself in this one special beautiful moment. We're bang. This thing happens. And then they see the guy drop and like, holy shit. Oh, yeah. And then they walk away. And it's the work. It's it's there's so many things involved. Right. There's so many moving pieces. You have to be working on your own mind to learn how to get out of your own way. You also have to be like really engrossed in whatever the activity is that you're doing, like obsessed in love with it, passionate about it. And then you have to have the discipline to show up and actually do the work. There's so many different moving peat and it all has to be managed and it's not solid. It's like, it's like a fucking raft on the ocean. It's moving around. You're always trying to like figure out how to keep it, keep it moving and functional. And it always seems unmanageable. And after it's over there, it's like, ugh, a fuck that even worked. Yeah, we call it the fader board. Oh, yeah. Right. You know, how do you get it all? And honestly, particularly in the last 15 years when I started really taking martial arts seriously, I have the stuff that I've been able to do right in my creative life are principles that I learned on the mat with my seafood. You know, guard your center. Keep your eye on the lead elbow. Get to the blind side. How often do you do that? I started, I think I'm in the 15th or 16th year. Seafood is over day before yesterday. So, you know, a bunch of times a week. And if I'm working on something or if you can make it the location, we'll have long stretches where we're doing it every day. And there's gradings. So you got to prep for those, you know. It's, uh, so what are you doing? You doing kung fu? Is it a very particular style? Traditional Wing Chun. Really? Yeah. Which is very underrated art form. Yes. Also, so many trade secrets and so different than how I see it when I'm looking at videos. And that in UFC, everything is out in the open and it's discussed and you see in a lot of the Eastern stuff, there was a turf or is and we're not really going to show them our footwork. We're not going to do this. So, but anyway, it's been a real deep dive with my seafood Eric Orham, whose seafood my seat gun is Grandmaster William Chung. Renown kind of Hong Kong rooftop fights all that stuff. Amazing. Laura, but very technical, difficult to build and easy to use. You know, you very rarely see that in the UFC. One of the best fighters in the UFC uses it regularly. Tony Ferguson. Tony Ferguson uses trapping hands. The Muk-Jong. Yeah. Yeah. He grabs wrists and comes over the top of the elbows. He does straight Wing Chun. He does it all the time. And he even practices on a wooden dummy. Yeah. I got my ass kicked by a wooden dummy for about three years and then I finally understood the principle of don't fight force and force. And you know, it's just nuts. So, anyway, half the time, if I would be in a critical artistic situation, I would just say, because Wing Chun problems or life problems, life problems are Wing Chun problems. And I would just go back to how did this kind of relate to because I don't like getting clocked and getting my teeth knocked in because we tend to sometimes we glove up, but we're not wearing mouthpieces. It's very well. You wear a mouthpiece? It's certainly not because he's very good at pulling his punches. And he's also even better at making sure that I don't accidentally hit him. But we get as close as we can to what the real experience would be. But again, it's like everything. I'm sure you know, a few clicks back down the road, there's things that instructors were doing that would be considered illegal to do to a group of students nowadays. Yeah, for sure. So, not just a few clicks. Wow, I was coming out. That's what I would imagine. Yeah. Oh, yeah. They'd hit each other. Yes. His students would get beat up. Yes. It was a normal thing. Yes. So, did you start training for Sherlock Holmes or did you start training before that? I didn't. It absolutely coincided with my recovery. And the two things just somehow or or others seemed to lock in when and talked to you off the record and afterwards about any and everything to do with my recovery as far as it locked him with this. It was an apprentice and apprenticeship. And it was an apprenticeship that was contingent on me being in a certain headspace. Well, it's a good thing too because it's a very addictive thing. People get very addicted to martial arts and it's a good substitute for sometimes negative addictions. You know, Bourdain before he died. He was obsessed with Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu. Yeah, became really obsessed with it at 58 and got really good. He was training every day and he was training twice a day every day. So, he went from when I first met him, he was chubby, he was smoking cigarettes, he drank every night, still kind of still drank every night. But, you know, he just did enough to, he didn't enough healthy things to keep his body together. And then his ex-wife got really into Jiu-Jitsu. And then he decided to follow one day to classes and he was kind of mocking it and laughing at it first and then became obsessed. And then really got good. I mean, he was and at the, look at he wanted a tournament. I mean, oh my gosh. Yeah, he's fucking 60 years old. Yeah, he's a age. What's really crazy is a picture of him walking down the street in, I think they were in Rome and he has no shirt on and he's fucking ripped. Anthony Bourdain, full six pack. Yeah, dude, he was obsessed. He would take a private every day. Look at him, look at that photo. That's crazy. He's like 60 something years old there. So, he would take a private lesson every day and then he would take a class. So, he would take a private lesson, sharpen up techniques and then he would roll, take group classes too, which is very critical. We got to roll with different people. 100%. Yeah. And so, he was in there. And it became a good thing for him to sort of become addicted to this positive thing. Yeah, I mean, for me, it wasn't going to be golf. It wasn't going to be something passive like that. Right. You know, I hear it's great, but it's been, it's just been a great gift. And it's also the thing where, you know, you're just, you're never done. I made black belt five years ago for another grading and now we're doing a lot of weapon stuff and it's just, I just think that's awesome. Congratulations. Yeah. My Taigwondo teacher said something to me when I was very young. He said that it is a tool for developing your human potential. Yeah. And I never forgot that because I'm like, yeah, it's because it's really difficult to do. Like all martial arts are really, it's really difficult to get your body to move that way and to be able to be effective in a conflict situation. And if you can do it and you can do it over and over again and you can overcome that difficult thing and you thought it was unsurmountable and then you figured out how to do it. Eventually you get to this point. You realize, well, everything in life is like that. Everything in life is like something that's a puzzle. You have to figure out what, how am I approaching it wrong? What can I do to make it better? How do I get more competent at this particular skill or this particular discipline? Yeah. And just the humility too. I mean, if I've noticed anything in the last couple of years, just in UFC, which by the way, I was doing a Robert Altman film called The Gingerbread Man back in the 90s and UFC had just started off and I was getting the VHS tapes and watching them. And so when they go back on the 25 years ago, I was like, I've been I've been I've been there from jump. That's awesome. But we watch, it's just that thing of no matter what you think, the the tides are changing quickly. And yeah. And you just got to keep working. Well, that was a real wake up call for a lot of martial artists was the UFC because a lot of the stuff that they were doing really wasn't effective. Yeah. They thought it would be if everybody was playing by the rules in the dojo and sort of following along the but once you really saw an actual caged event where people were just going balls out, you realize, oh, a lot of the stuff just doesn't work. Yeah. And I love how messy it was at the beginning too because the style matchups were so if they were almost crazy laughable until you until you saw the violence and no weight classes. You and I share another passion of rest of mods. Yes. Yes. You have a was it a 1970 Mustang? Yeah. I got the 302 out of a speed core a couple other ones. Speed court does amazing stuff. They're great. Yeah. And when I saw that they were doing your car, I go, oh, this is going to be good. You picked a unique color too. Yeah. I'm pretty sure that's the only. Oh, look at that thing. Yeah. That's back east right now. That's a good car for for straightaways. That's a nice long island car. Yeah. Yeah. It's beautiful. But the beautiful thing about something like speed core is they're going to take that car and make it so that it's manageable. You can actually drive it. If you drove a real 1970 stock car, it would be it's horrific. Yeah. And it's amazing how far we've come. Yeah. And those cars, it's like you're like blindfolded as you're driving. You're sort of aware of what what the car is going to do as you turn the wheel. But not really. No, it's it to me. It's like it's like a crop duster without wings. Every time I start, I just go, Jesus Christ. I got kids. I got kids. And also since I threw my hat in the ring with this kind of green technology initiatives, I I'm probably going to wind up auctioning them all off. Yeah. To be honest, right. You know, drove a little BMW electric car here. I saw. I and I started laughing when I saw it pulling the park. I'm like, oh, okay. I get it. You got to do what you got to do. I have a Tesla. I'll hold on to a few works. Yeah. You have to hold onto that one. You got to what is this? That is a tarantula hawk that Maynard Keenan from Tools sent me from his farm in Arizona. It's we were talking about it on a podcast. And he's like, if you ever seen one, I go, no. And then a week later, one arrived in the mail. Hold on. I miss you with this says. Yeah. You can't read it. Yeah. By the way, if I've been too far off Mike this whole time, now you're fine. Okay. We're good. I can give you a sign. Jamie's a master. He knows how to handle this. I know you have a lot of other shit to do. So I'm going to let you get out of here. I just want to say it's an honor. Honour to meet you. I feel pleasure to sit down and talk to you. Appreciate you taking your time and best of luck with everything. Just flew by pal. Yeah. I'll be back. Trust me. Okay. I hope you do. I hope you do come back. Bye, everybody. You know what I wanted to get to. There's a guy named Bran Farron. Have you heard of him?
 The following is a conversation with Elon Musk his third time on this the Lex Friedman podcast Yeah, make yourself comfortable. Oh wow, okay Did you don't do the headphone thing? No, okay. I mean hot clothes so I get me to get the same clothes The clothes you are the sexiest son. Hey babe. Yeah, yeah, I get enough of the oil. Oh, baby I'm gonna clip that out Anytime somebody messes with me about you You watch the party and you think I'm sexy come right out and tell me so So good okay serious mode activate all right The serious mode come on your Russian you can be serious. Yeah, everyone's serious. All the time in Russia. Yeah Yeah, we'll get we'll get there. We'll get there Yeah, it's gotten soft Allow me to say that the space X launch of human beings to orbit on May 30th 2020 Was seen by many as the first step in a new era of human space exploration These human spaceflight missions were a beacon of hope to me and to millions over the past two years Is our world has been going through one of the most difficult periods in recent human history We saw we see the rise of division fear cynicism and the loss of common humanity Right when it is needed most so first Elon, let me say thank you for giving the world hope and reason to be excited about the future. Oh, it's kind of you to say I do want to do that humanity has obviously a lot of issues and and You know people at times do do bad things, but you know despite all that You know, I love humanity and I think we should Uh Make sure we do everything we can to have a good future and an exciting future and one where that maximizes the happiness of the people Let me ask about the coup dragon demo 2 so that that first flight with humans on board How did you feel leading up to that launch? We scared. Are you excited? I was going through your mind so much was it stake Yeah, no, that was extremely stressful no question. Um, we obviously could not Um, let them down in any way um, so Extremely stressful I'd say uh to say at least But we did I was confident that at the time that we launched that No one could think of anything Uh, at all to do that would improve the probability of success Um, and we we racked our brains to think of any possible way to improve the probability of success We cannot think of anything more and and nor could NASA and so Then that's just the best that we could do so then we we had We went ahead and launched Now I'm not a religious person Um, but I nonetheless got on my knees and prayed for for that mission We able to sleep no How did I feel when it was a success first when the launch was a success and when they returned back home or back to earth There's a great relief Yeah, it is for for high-striest situations. I find it's it's not so much elation as relief um And um, you know, I think once as we got more comfortable and proved out the systems because you know, we really Um, you know, you got to make sure everything works um, I was it was definitely a lot more enjoyable with the subsequent uh, astronaut missions and I thought the The inspiration mission was was actually very inspiring um inspiration for mission um, I'd encourage people to watch the Inspiration documentary on Netflix. It's actually really good um And it really isn't so I was actually inspired by that um and I a I so that when I felt I was kind of able to enjoy the the actual mission and not just be able to rest all the time So for people that somehow don't know it's the all civilian first time all civilian out the space thought to orbit Yeah, and it was that high I think the highest orbit that uh in like an 30 or 40 years or something the only one that was higher Was this one shuttle or sorry a Hubble uh servicing mission um and then before that it would have been Apollo in 72 It's very wild So it's cool. It's got you know, I think uh, you know as uh as the species like we want to be you know continuing to Do better and reach higher ground and and like I think it would be tragic extremely tragic if um Apollo was the high watermark for humanity, you know, and that and that's as far as we ever got um and it's um It's concerning that here we are 49 years after the last mission to the moon and so almost half a century Uh, and we've not been back Um, and that's that's worrying. It's like is that does that mean we've peaked as a civilization or what so Like I think we got to get back to the moon and and bullet base there, you know a science base I think we could learn a lot about the nature of the universe if we have a proper science base on the moon um You know like we have a science base in Antarctica and you know many other parts of world and um So that that that's like I think the next big thing we've got to have like a a serious like moon base um and then get people to Mars and You know get get out there and be a space-bearing civilization. I'll ask you about some of those details But since you're so busy with the hard engineering challenges of everything that's involved I you're still able to marvel at the magic of at all of space travel Of every time the rocket goes up especially when it's a crude mission Are you just so overwhelmed with all the challenges that you have to solve And actually sort of to add to that The reason I wanted to ask this question of may 30th. It's it's been some time so you can look back and think about the impact already It's already at the time. It was an engineering problem. Maybe now it's becoming a historic moment Like it's a moment that How many moments will be remembered about the 21st century to me That or something like that maybe inspiration for one of those will be remembered as the early steps of a new age of uh space exploration Yeah, I mean during the launches itself. So I mean the thing I think maybe some people know but a lot of people don't know I'm actually a chief engineer of SpaceX. So The you know, I've signed off on pretty much all the design decisions um and You know, so if there's Something that goes wrong with that A vehicle. It's fundamentally my fault, you know, so um So I'm really just thinking about all the things that like so so when I see the rocket I see all the things that could go wrong and the things that could be better and the same with the Dragon spacecraft. It's like I'll see people see oh, this is a space craft or a rocket and that's looks really cool I'm like I've I've like a readout of like this is that these are the risks these are the problems. That's what I see like So Not what other people see when they see the product, you know, so let me ask you then to analyze starship in that same way I know you have you'll talk about in more detail about starship in the near future perhaps you had that I don't know if you want but Just in that same way like you said you see when you see up Uh, when you see a rocket you see the sort of elicit the risks in that same way you said that starship is a really hard problem So many ways I can ask this but If you magically could solve one problem perfectly one engineering problem perfectly Which one would it be on starship? I'm sorry on starship. So is it may be related to the efficiency the The engine the weight of the different components the complexity of various things maybe the controls of the the crazy thing as the due to land No, it's actually the by far the the biggest thing absorbing my time is a engine production Not the design of the engine the I have often said prototypes are Easy production is hard um So we have the most advanced rocket engine that's ever been designed um The because I say currently the the best rocket engine ever is probably the RD 180 or RD 170 That that's the door of our engine basically um and um and still I think an engine surely count if it's gotten something to orbit So our engine has not gotten anything to orbit yet But it is it's the first engine that's actually Better than then the the the Russian RD engines which are amazing design So you're talking about Raptor engine what makes it amazing? What what are the different aspects of it that Make it like what do you the most excited about uh if the whole thing works in terms of efficiency all those kinds of things Well, it's But Raptor is a a full flow staged combustion Engine and it's at operating at a very high chamber pressure So one of the key figures married or perhaps the key figure of merit is What is the chamber pressure at which the rocket engine can operate that's the combustion chamber pressure So Raptor is designed to operate at 300 bar possibly maybe higher the standard atmospheres so um The record right now for operational engine is the RD engine that I mentioned the Russian RD which is I believe run to 67 uh bar um and The the the difficulty of the chamber pressure is increases on a non-linear basis. So 10% more pressure is more like uh 50% more difficult um But that that chair pressure is that that that is what allows you to get a very high power density for uh for the engine um so enabling um A very high thrust to weight ratio um and uh a very high specific impulse So specific impulse is like a measure of the efficiency of a rocket engine or um it's really the the the Exhaust the effective exhaust velocity of of the gas coming out of the engine um So uh With with a very high chamber pressure you can have um A a compact engine that nonetheless has a high expansion ratio which is the ratio between the uh um exit nozzle uh and the uh throat so you know engines like you see your rocket engines got like sort of like about like a hour glass shape It's like a chamber and then next down and there's a nozzle and the ratio of the the the exotimer to the The throat uh it's an expansion ratio. So why is it such a hard engine to manufacture a scale Uh, it's very complex What is complexity mean here's a lot of components involved there's a lot of a lot of components and a lot of uh unique materials That uh so we have to invent a Several alloys that don't exist in order to make this engine work um materials problem too It's a materials problem and um it in a in a staged combustion that full flow staged combustion There are many feedback loops in the system so uh basically you've you've got propellants and and and uh hot gas flowing um Simultaneously to so many different places on the engine um and uh they all have a recursive effect on each other so you change one thing here it has a recursive effect here it changes something over there and and it's It's it's it's quite it's hard to control um like there's a reason no one's made this before um but um and the reason we're doing um a stage combustion Full flow is because it has the highest of the highest of the vehicle possible uh efficiency um so And in in in order to make a fully reusable rocket um Which that that's the really the holy grail of overall rocketry um You have to have everything's got to be the best uh it's got to be the best engine the best airframe the best heat shield um extremely light avionics um You know very clever control mechanisms um you've got to shed mass in any possible way that you can um for example We are instead of putting landing legs on the booster and ship we are going to catch them with a tower To save the weight of the landing legs so that's like I mean We're talking about catching the largest flying object ever made uh With On a giant tower with with trough stick arms It's like cruddy kid with fly but much bigger I mean pulling this probably won't work the first time Uh and anyway, so this is bananas this is banana stuff so you mentioned that you doubt Well not you doubt but there There's days or moments when you doubt that this is even possible It's so difficult The possible part is Well at this point We'll I think we will we'll get starship to work um Um There's a question of timing how long will it take us to do this uh How long will it take us to actually achieve uh full and rapid reusability um Because it will take a probably many launches before we're able to have full and rapid reusability um But I can say that that the physics Pencils out like the like we're not uh Like at this point. I'd say we're confident. They would that sick like let's say we're I'm very confident sick Success is in the set of all possible outcomes Right. It's not a set of But for a while there I was not convinced that success was in the set of possible outcomes So which is a very important actually but so we were um Um There's a chance I'm saying there's a chance exactly um Uh, just not sure how How long it will take uh We have very very talented team. They're working night and day to make it happen um and uh Like like said that the the the the critical thing to achieve for the revolution in spaceflight and for humanity to be a space-faring civilization is to have a fully and rapidly reusable rocket over rocket Um, there's not even been any Over rocket that's been fully reusable ever and this has always been the the the the the holy grail of rocketry um and Many smart people very smart people Have tried to do this before and they're not succeeded. So um because it's such a hard problem What's your source of belief in situations like this When the engineering problem is so difficult. There's a lot of experts Many of whom you admire who have failed in the past. Yes, and um A lot of people You know the a lot of experts maybe journalists all the kind of you know the public in general have a lot of doubt about whether it's possible And you yourself know that even if it's a non-null set non-empty set of success It's still unlikely or very difficult like where do you go to both personally um intellectually as an engineer as a team Like for source of strength needed to sort of persevere through this And to keep going with the project take it to completion you S.O.S.A. strength. I just really not how I think about things um I mean for me it's simply this this is something that is important to get done um and we we should just keep doing it um Or die trying and I I don't need S.O.S.A. strength. So quitting is not even like um Yes, no it's not in my nature and I don't Care about optimism or pessimism Fuck that we're gonna get it done gonna get it done Can you then zoom back in to specific problems with starship or any engineer and problems you work on Can you try to introspect your particular biological and your network your thinking process in this How you think through problems through different engineering and design problems is there like a systematic process You spoken about first principles thinking. Yeah, it's their kind of process to it. Well um You know like saying like like physics is low and everything else is a recommendation Um like I've met a lot of people looking break the law, but um having it met anyone who could break physics so first for you know any kind of Technology problem you have just sort of just make sure you're not violating physics um and You know uh First principles analysis. I think it's something that can be applied to Really any walk of life or anything really it's just it's really just saying um You know, let's let's boil something down to the most fundamental uh Principles the things that we are most confident are true at a foundational level And that sets your at your sets your axiomatic base and then you reason up from there And then you cross check your conclusion against the the axiomatic truth um so Um, you know some basics and physics would be like are you violating conservation of energy or momentum or something like that You know then you just it's not gonna work um so Uh, that's You know, so that's just to establish is it is it possible And then another good physics tool is thinking about things in the limit if you if you take a particular thing and you Uh, scale it to a very large number or to a very small number how does how does things change um, well it's like temper like in a number of things you manufacture something like that and then in time Yeah, like let's say it takes an example of like um Like manufacturing which I think is just a very underrated problem um and and Uh, likes it it's much harder to Take a advanced technology product and bring it into volume manufacturing that it is to design it in the first place my orders magnitude so Um, so let's say you're trying to figure out is um, like why is this This uh, part or product expensive is it um Because of something fundamentally foolish that we're doing or is it because our volume is too low And so they say okay, well, what if our volume was a million years a year is it still expensive? That's what I mean, but I think about things to the limit If it's still expensive at a million units a year then volume is not the reason why you think it's expensive There's something fundamental about design And then you then can focus on the Reducing complexity or something like that in the design to change change the part to be something that is uh Uh Not fundamentally expensive But it like that's a common thing in rock tree because the the Uniflying is as relatively low And so a common excuse would be well, it's expensive because our uniform is low Um, and if we were in like automotive or something like that or consumer electronics then our cost would be lower I'm like okay, so let's say we skate now you're making a million units a year. Is this the most expensive? The answer is yes then Economy's a scale and not the issue Do you throw into manufacturing do you throw like supply chain Talk about resources and materials and stuff like that do you throw that into the calculation of trying to reason from first Principles like how we're gonna make the supply chain work here Yeah, yeah, and then the cost of materials things like that or is that too much exactly so um like And another like a good example like of thinking about things in the limit is um if you take any Uh You know any any Product eight machine or whatever um Like take a rocket or whatever and say Um if you've got if if you look at the room if you're raw materials in the rocket um So you're gonna have like a I don't know aluminum steel titanium in canal Uh, especially speciality alloys um Copper and and you say what are the how What what's the weight of the constituent elements of each of these elements and what is their raw material value and that sets the Asmetic limit for how Uh, lower the cost of the vehicle can be unless you change the materials So and then when you do that I call it like maybe the magic one number or something like that So that would be like if you had the You know a like just a pile of these raw materials. Yeah, you could wave the magic wand and rearrange the atoms into the final shape um That would be the lowest possible cost that you could make this thing for unless you change the materials So then and that is always a use almost always a very low number um So then the the what's actually causing these to be expensive is how you put the atoms into the desired shape You Yeah, actually if you're mind me taking a tiny tangent had uh, I often talk to Jim Keller who's something to work with you Oh, yeah, Jim was uh, yeah, great work at Tesla So um, I suppose he carries the flame of the same kind of thinking that you're you're talking about now um, and I guess I see that same thing at Tesla and And uh, SpaceX folks who worked there they kind of learned this way of thinking and it kind of becomes obvious almost But anyway, I had um argument not argument Uh, he educated me about how cheap it might be to manufacture a Tesla bot We just we had an argument what is how can you reduce the cost of scale of producing a robot because So I got in the chance to interact quite a bit Obviously in in the academic circles with human robots and then my boss and dynamics and stuff like that And then they're very expensive to build um, and then Uh, Jim kind of schooled me on saying like okay, like this kind of first principles thinking of how can we get the cost of manufacturing? um, I suppose you do that you have done uh, that kind of thinking for Tesla bot and for all kinds of All kinds of complex systems that are traditionally seen as complex and you say okay How can we simplify everything now? Yeah, I mean I think if you if you are really good at manufacturing You can basically Make at high volume you can basically make anything for a cost That asymptotically approaches is the role of raw material value of the constituents plus any intellectual property that you need to do license Anything right But it's it's hard. It's not like that's a very hard thing to do but but it is possible for anything Anything in volume can be made of like I said for a cost That asymptotically approaches is raw material constituents plus intellectual property license rights So what will often happen in trying to design a product is people start with the tools and and parts and methods that they're familiar with um, and then and try to create the product using their existing tools and methods um, the other way to think about it is Uh, actually imagine the try to imagine the platonic ideal of the perfect product or technology whatever it might be um, and say what is this what what is the perfect arrangement of atoms? That would be the the best possible product And now let us try to figure out how to get the atoms in that shape I mean it's it sounds um And it's almost like a rica mordie absurd until you start to really think about it and it you really should Think about it in this way because everything else is kind of uh if you if you think uh You you might fall victim to the momentum of the way things are done in the past unless you think in this way Well, just as a function of inertia people will want to use the same tools and methods that they're familiar with um They just that's what they'll do by default Um, and then that that will lead to an outcome of things that can be made with those tools and methods But it is unlikely to be the um platonic ideal of the perfect product um So then so that's why it's it's good to think of things in both directions They're like what can we build with the tools that we have but then but but also what is the what is the perfect the theoretical Perfect product look like and and that that theoretical perfect product is going to be a moving target because the as you learn more The definition of or for that perfect product will will change because you don't actually know what the perfect product is But you can successfully approximate a a more perfect product um, so think about it like that and then saying okay now what tools methods materials whatever do we need to Create in order to get the atoms in that shape But for people very rarely think about it that way But it's a powerful tool I should mention that the brilliant shavon zillis is hanging hanging out with us In case you hear a voice of wisdom from uh from from from outside from up above Okay, so let me ask you about Mars you mentioned it would be great for science to put um a base on the moon to do some research but The truly big leap again in this category of seemingly impossible is to put a human being on Mars When do you think spaceux will land a human being on Mars? The best case is about five years worst case tenures What are the determining factors would you say from an engineering perspective or is that that not the bottlenecks? I know it's it's fundamentally um You're engineering the the vehicle um um I mean starship is the most Complex in advanced rocket that's ever been made by I don't know what if I get to hear something like that. It's a lot. It's really next level so um and the fundamental optimization of Starship is minimizing cost pretend to overt and ultimately cost pretend to surface of Mars Um, this may seem like a mogen tile objective, but it is actually the thing that needs to be optimized Like there is a certain Cost pretend to the surface of Mars where we can afford to establish a self-sustaining city Um and then and then above that we cannot afford to do it um So right right now you couldn't fly to Mars for trillion dollars doesn't know amount of money could get your ticket to Mars So we need to get that above You know to get that like something that is actually possible at all um Um, but but then but that's thus We don't we don't just want to have you know with Mars flags and footprints and then not come back for a half century like we did with the moon uh in in order to Pass a very important to great filter. I think we need to be a multi-planet species um Let's make sound somewhat esoteric to to a lot of people, but uh Yeah, give eventually given enough time uh This is something the earth is likely to experience some calamity um that could be Yeah, something that humans do to themselves or an external event like happen to the dinosaurs um and um but a bit of you know eventually And any if if not none if if none of that happens and somehow magically we we keep going Uh, then the sun will ex the sun is gradually expanding um and will engulf the earth um and probably earth gets too hot for uh life in Uh About 500 million years it's a long time, but that's only 10% longer than earth has been around and so if you think about like the Because the current situation is really remarkable um and kind of hard to believe but Uh, it's been around four and a half billion years and this is the first time if one half billion years that it's been possible to extend life beyond earth And that window of opportunity may be open for a long time and I hope it is but it also may be open for a short time and we should uh, I think it was wise for us to uh Act quickly while the video is open just in case it closes Yeah, the existence of nuclear weapons pandemics All kinds of threats. Yeah, should uh, should kind of um give us some motivation I mean civilization could get um Could die with a bang or a whimper you know if it's uh If it dies of demographic it collapse then it's more of a whimper obviously Uh, but it and if it's world war three is more of a bang But but these are all risks um, I mean it's important to think of these things and just You know things things as like probabilities not certainties um, there's no probability that Something about will happen on earth. I like I think most likely the future will be good um But there's like let's say for arguments sake um a 1% chance per century of Of a civilization ending event like that was Stephen Hawking's estimate Um, I think he's he might be right about that uh, so then uh You know, we should basically Think of this like being a multi-plant species is like taking out insurance for life itself like life insurance for life So turn into an informal real quick life insurance for life. Yes Um, and you know we can bring the the the creatures from you know plants animals from earth Tomorrow's and breathe life into the planet um and and have a second planet with with life um That would be great um, they can't bring themselves there, you know So if we don't bring them to Mars then they will just For sure, or die when the sun expands anyway and then that'll be it What do you think is the most difficult aspect of building a civilization on Mars? Terraforming Mars like from a generic perspective from a financial perspective human perspective to get To get a large number of folks there who will never return back to earth Uh, no, I think it's what need return some will return back to earth. They will choose to stay there for the rest of their lives Yeah, many will um But uh, you know, we The we need the spaceships back like the ones that go to Mars freedom back So you're gonna hop on if you want, you know, I think it's like but we can't just you know how the spaces come back The those things are expensive we need them back like to come back and turn the trip I mean, do you think about the terraforming aspect like actually building are you still focused right now on the spaceships part that's so critical Yeah, yeah, this is we absolutely if you can't get there nothing else matters So and like said you you can't get there with At some extraordinarily high cost I mean the current cost of um, let's say one ton to the surface of Mars is on the order of a billion dollars So because you don't just need the rocket and the launch and everything you need like heat shield you need you know guidance system you need deep space communications. You need some kind of landing system So like rough approximation would be Uh, a billion dollars per ton to the surface of Mars right now This is obviously Way too expensive to create a self-sustaining civilization um, so we need to improve that by At least a factor of a thousand a million per ton Yes, ideally less that much less than a million ton, but if it's not Like it's got to be You say like what well how much can society afford to spend or want to just want to spend on a self-sustaining City on Mars the self-sustaining part is important like it's just the key threshold um, the great filter will have been passed When the city on Mars It can survive even if the space shifts from earth stop coming for any reason Doesn't matter what the reason is but if they stop coming for any reason will it die out or will it not and if there's even one Critical ingredient missing then It still doesn't count. It's like You know if you're a long sea voyage and you've got everything except vitamin C It's only a matter of time, you know, you're gonna die So so we're gonna get Mars a Mars city to the point where it's self-sustaining Um, I'm not sure this will really happen in my lifetime, but I I hope to see it at least have a lot of momentum And and then you could say like what is the minimum tonnage necessary to uh have a self-sustaining city um And there's a lot of uncertainty about this you can say like I don't know It's probably at least a million tons um Because you have to set up a lot of infrastructure on on Mars um like I said you can't be missing any anything that In order for self-sustaining you can't be missing like you need you know a semiconductor fabs you need iron ore refineries you like you need all lots of things, you know, uh, so Um, and Mars is not super hospitable It's the least inhospitable planet, but it's definitely a fixer operapha planet That's out of earth Yes, earth is pretty good. It's like easy Yeah, and also I should we should clarify it in the solar system. Yes, in the solar system There might be nice Like vacation spots There might be some great planets out there, but it's hopeless to get there. Yeah, way way way way too hard To say the least let me push back on that not really a pushback but a quick curve ball of a question So you did mention physics as the the first starting point so um General relativity allows for warm holes They technically can exist. Do you think um those can ever be leveraged by humans to travel fast in this be a light Well Are you saying that? The whole thing is is debatable the That we currently do not know of any means of going fast in the speed of light Um There there is like Like There are some ideas about having space like so so You're gonna let move at the speed of light through through space, but If you can make space itself move That that that's like that that's a real warming space If um space is capable of moving faster than the speed of light Right uh like the universe in the big bang the universe the universe expanded it much much more than the speed of light by a lot yeah so um But the If this is possible the the amount of energy required to wolf space is so Gigantic it's boggles the mind So all the work you've done with propulsion how much innovation is possible with rocket propulsion is this um I mean you've seen it all and you're constantly innovating in every aspect How much is possible like how much can you get 10x somehow is there something in there in physics That you can get significant improvement in terms of efficiency of engines and all those kinds of things Well as I was saying like the really the holy grail is a fully and rapidly reusable orbital system um so uh right now uh The Falcon 9 is the only reusable rocket out there but but the the booster comes back in lands. I'm sure you've seen the videos Uh and we get the nose cono fairing back but we do not get the upper stage back so That means that we have a minimum cost of Building an upper stage um You can think of like a two stage rocket of sort of like two airplanes like a big airplane and a small airplane And we get bigger plane back with another small airplane And so it's still cost a lot you know, so that upper stage is You know at least 10 million dollars um and then the Degree of the the booster is not as reuse it is not as rapidly and completely reusable as we'd like in order the fairings So you know our kind of Minimum marginal cost not counting overhead for per flight is on the order of 15 20 million dollars maybe um so That's that's extremely good for it's by far better than any rocket ever in history um but uh With full and rapid reusability we can Reduce the cost per ton to orbit by Uh a factor of a hundred But just think of it like um Like imagine if you had an aircraft or something or a car Oh yeah, and if you had to buy a new car every time you went for a drive There'll be very expensive Every silly frankly, but um But you in fact you just refuel the car or recharge the car And that's uh makes your trip Like I don't know a thousand times cheaper So It's the same for rockets uh if you So it's very difficult to make this complex machine that can go to orbit And so if you cannot reuse it and have to have to throw even any part of any significant part of it away that massively increases the cost so You know Starship and theory could do A cost per launch of like a million maybe two million dollars or something like that um And uh and put over a hundred tons in orbit This is crazy. Yeah, so that's incredible. So you're saying like it's uh by far the biggest bang for the block is to make the fully reusable versus like some kind of Brilliant breakthrough into your ethical physics. Yeah, no, there's no there's no brilliant breaking up. There's no It just meant you were gonna make the rocket reusable. This is this is an extremely difficult entering problem Got it. Uh, but no new physics is required I Just brilliant engineering. Let me ask a slightly philosophical fun question Gotta ask I know you're focused on getting to Mars, but once we're there on Mars. What do you what form of government? economic system Political system do you think would work best for an early civilization of humans? Is do you I mean the interesting reason to talk about the stuff? It also may helps people dream about the future. I know you're really focused about The short term engineering dream, but it's like I don't know There's something about imagining an actual civilization of Mars that gives people So it really gives people hope well It would be a new frontier and an opportunity to rethink the whole natural government Just as was done in the creation of the United States so uh I mean, I would suggest um having uh Direct democracy like people vote directly on things as opposed to representative democracy. So Uh representative democracy. I think is to uh subject to special interest and You know a coercion of the politicians and that kind of thing um So I'd recommend That that those just um Direct democracy people vote on laws the population votes on laws themselves And then the laws must be short enough that people can understand them Yeah, and then like keeping a well-informed populist like really being transparent about all the information But what they're voting for absolute transparency. Yeah And not make it as annoying as those cookies we have to accept the Accept cookies I go always like You know, it's like always like a slight amount of trepidation when you click accept cookies like Like feel as though there's like perhaps like a like a very tiny chance that'll open a portal to hell or something like that Exactly Why do they what why do they keep it? Why do you accept the what do they want with this cookie? I like somebody got upset with accepting cookies or something somewhere I mean who cares like So annoying to keep keep accepting all these cookies me This is just a great extent. Yes, you can have my damn cookie. I don't care. Whatever He heard it from me on first he accepts all your damn cookies. Yeah It's all asking me annoying Yeah, it's a one example of implementation of a good idea done Really horribly yeah, it's somebody who was like there's some good intentions of like Privacy or whatever, but now everyone's just has to take accept cookies and it's now you know You have billions of people who have to keep clicking accept cookie and super annoying Then we just just accept the damn cookie. It's fine. There is like um I think a fundamental problem that we're because we've not really had a major Like a world war or something like that in a while and obviously we would would like to not have hold was um There's not been a cleansing function for rules and regulations um So wars did have Some sort of lining in that there would be a A reset on rules and regulations after a war. So all those one and two there were huge resets on rules and regulations um Now as if the society society does not have a war that and there's no cleansing function or garbage collection for rules and regulations Then rules and regulations will accumulate every year because they're immortal. There's no actual humans die, but the lowest owned so The we need a garbage collection function for rules and regulations that should not just be immortal um Because some of the rules and regulations that are put in place will be counterproductive Uh done with good intentions, but counterproductive sometimes not done with good intentions. So Um, if you just if rules and regulations is to accumulate every year um and get more and more of them Then eventually you won't be able to do anything You're just like golevard with you know tie down by thousands of little strings and we hit we see that in um, you know US and like basically all all economies that have been around for for a while uh and and regulators and legislators Create new rules and regulations every year, but they don't put effort into removing them And I think that's very important that we put effort into removing rules and regulations um But it gets tough because you get special interests that then are dependent on like they they have a You know, uh Invested interest in that whatever rule and regulation and that they then they fight To not get it removed um Yeah, so it i mean i guess the problem with the constitution is it's it's kind of like c versus java because it doesn't have any garbage collection built in I think there should be a i when you first said that the the metaphor of garbage collection coding set point for the coding standpoint. Yeah, yeah I it would be interesting interesting is the laws themselves kind of had a built-in Thing where they kind of die after a while and somebody explicitly publicly defend them Yeah, so that that's sort of it's not like somebody has to kill them. They kind of die themselves They disappear. Yeah um Not the defend java or anything, but you know the c++, you know, you could also have great garbage collection and python and so on Yeah, so yeah, something's got something needs to happen or or just thought the Civilizations arteries arteries just harden over time and and you can just get less and less done because there's just a rule against everything so So i think like i don't know for miles or whatever i'd say oh even for you Obviously for earth as well like i think there should be an active process for removing rules and regulations and questioning their existence just um Like if we've got a function for creating rules and regulations because rules and regulations can also think of it's like they're like software or lines of code for operating Civilization. That's the rules and regulations um So it's like we shouldn't have rules and regulations, but the you have your code accumulation, but no code removal And so it just gets to become basically archaic blood wear after a while um and then it's just it makes it hard for things to progress So i don't know maybe mars you have like a uh You know any given law must have a sunset, you know and and uh and require active voting to keep Restorting to keep it up there, you know um and i actually also say like And these just i don't know recommendations of thoughts and Ultimately will be up to the people on Mars to decide but i think um It should be easier to Remove a law than to add one because of the just to overcome the inertia of laws so maybe it's like uh For argument sake you need like say 60% vote to have a law take effect But only a 40% vote to remove it So let me be the guy you you posted a meme on twitter recently where there's this there's like a row of urinals And guys just walks all the way across And he tells you about crypto So this is this i mean that's how to be so many times i think it maybe even literally uh yeah Do you think technologically speaking there's any room for ideas of smart contracts that are so on Because you mentioned laws That's an interesting implement use of things like smart contracts to implement the laws by least government's function Like something built on a theory more maybe A dog coin that enables smart contracts somehow I never quite understand this whole smart contracting um, you know I mean So i'm too downtown status smart contracts Um, it's a good line I mean my general approach to any kind of like deal or whatever is just make sure this clarity of understanding That's the most important thing And and just keep any kind of deal very very short and simple plain language And just make sure everyone understands this is the deal. Everyone is it clear um and uh And then what are the consequences if various things don't happen um But usually deal deals are um You know business deals or whatever are a way too long and complex and overly layered and pointlessly You mentioned that doge is the people's coin Yeah, and you said that you were literally going space x may consider literally putting Uh a doge coin on the moon Is it is this something you're still considering um Mars perhaps Uh, do you think there's some chance we've talked about political systems on Mars that uh doge coin is the Official currency of Mars that's happening in the future Well, I think Mars itself will need to have a different currency because you can't synchronize Judas speed of light Oh, not easily um, so must be completely stand alone from earth Well, yeah, because the Mars is at closest approach. It's four light minutes away roughly and then at first approach. Uh, it's roughly 20 light minutes away Uh, maybe a little more um So you can't really have something synchronizing You know if you get if you've got a 20 minutes to be light issue if it's got a one minute blockchain Yeah, it's not going to synchronize probably um So Mars would would uh, I don't know if Mars would have a cryptocurrency as a thing, but probably seems likely Um, but it would be some kind of localized thing on Mars um And you let the people decide Yeah, absolutely Is that the future of Mars should be up to the Martians uh, yeah, so um I think the cryptocurrency thing is an interesting approach to reducing the um error in the The database that is called money um You know, I think I have a pretty deep understanding of the of what money actually is on a practical day-to-day basis because of PayPal um You know, I really got in deep there um And right right now the money system actually for you have practical purposes is is really a bunch of uh heterogeneous Mainframes running uh old cobalt Okay, you mean literally that's literally literally what's happening in batch mode Okay, in batch mode. Yeah, I putty the poor fastest you have to maintain that code. Okay, that's a That's a pain that's pain not even for trans coal mall. Yep. It's cobalt Like and they stole the banks were still buying mainframes in 2021 and running ancient cobalt code uh, and uh You know the the federal service like probably even older than the but what the banks have and they have an old cobalt mainframe And so now and and so the the the government effectively has editing privileges on the on the money database And they use those editing privileges to um Make more money when if they want And this increases the error in the database that is money So if I think money should really be viewed through the lens of information theory and uh, and so it's uh You're kind of like uh like an internet connection like what's the bandwidth? Uh, you know, total but rate what is the latency jutter Pack a drop You know Errors in errors in network communication She's thinking money like that basically um, I think that's probably why we think that and and then say what what system Uh from an information at 30 standpoint allows an economy to function the best uh, and you know crypto is an attempt to reduce the the error uh in In in money that is contributed by uh governments Deluting the money supply as basically a pernicious for pernicious form of taxation So both policy in terms of with inflation and actual like technological cobalt like cryptocurrency takes us into the 21st century in terms of the actual Systems that allow you to do the transaction to store wealth all those kinds of things Like so just think of money as information people um often will think of money as having power in and of itself um It does not money is uh is information and it does not have power in and of itself uh the like you're going to applying the physics Tools of thinking about things in the limit is helpful if you are stranded on a tropical island um and uh You have a trillion dollars useless Because there's no there's no resource allocation money is a database resource allocation But there's no resource to allocate except for self so money is useless um Uh If you're stranded on desert island with no food You uh all the bitcoin in the world will Not stop you from starving yeah, so um So like to just just think of money as as a Database for resource allocation um across time and space and And then what what what system Uh it is what what in what form should that that database what data system What what what would be most effective now that there's a there is a fundamental issue with um say but coin and its current form In that it's the transaction volume is very limited um and uh the Latency the it's the latency for for probably confirmed transactions to is too long much longer than you'd like So it's not it's actually not great from um Transaction volume standpoint or early latency standpoint um So it is perhaps useful as As to so to solve an aspect of the money database problem uh Which is the sort of store of wealth or an in accounting of relative obligations I suppose Um, but it is not useful as a currency as a day-to-day currency but people have proposed different technological solutions Yeah, lightning network and the layer two technologies on top of that I mean it's it's all it seems to be all kind of a tradeoff But the point is it's kind of brilliant to say that just think about it information think about what kind of database What kind of infrastructure enables Yeah, just like for your company um and you need to have some Thing that it allows for the efficient to to have efficient Value ratios between products and services. So you've got this massive number of products and services. A need to You can't just barter barter. It's like that would be extremely unwieldy so you need something that gives you the uh A ratio of exchange between goods and services um and and then i did something that allows you to Shift obligations across time like debt debt and equity shift obligations across time. Then what does what does the best job of that? um Part of the reason why i think there's some um Merit's doge coin even though it was obviously created as a joke um Is that it it actually does have a much higher uh transaction volume capability than bitcoin um And the you know the cut the costs of doing a transaction the the the doge coin fee is is very low Like right now if you want to do it a bitcoin transaction the price of doing that transaction is very high So you could not use it effectively for most things Um and in order nor could it even scale to a high volume um Uh And when bitcoin was you know started i guess one around 2008 or something like that um The internet connections were much worse than the rj like order of magnitude I mean it's there's the way way worse you know in 2008 so So like having us you know a small uh block size or whatever is You know and and along Synchronization time is made sense in 2008, but to you know 2021 or fast forward 10 years it's like it's it's like It's comically low, you know, it's uh so um And i think there's some value to having a linear increase in the amount of currency that uh is generated um So because some amount of the currency you'd like like if a if a if a currency is too deflationary or like uh or should say if if If a if a currency is expected to increase in value of time there's reluctance to spend it Because they like oh i if i i'll just hold it not spend it because it's scarcity is increasing with time So if i spend it now then i will regret spending it so i will just you know hold it um But if there's Some delusion of the currency occurring over time that's that's more of an incentive to use it as a currency so um those coins somewhat randomly has uh a um Just if a fixed number of of sort of coins or hash strings that uh Or generate every year so there's there's some inflation, but it's not a percentage it based it's a it's so that the It's a fixed number so the percentage of inflation will necessarily decline over time um So it just i don't i'm not saying that it's like the ideal system for A currency, but i think it actually is uh just fundamentally better than Anything else i've seen just by accident um so i like i said um around 2008 so you're not uh You know some people suggested you might be said to oh shina komodo you've previously said you're not I'm gonna ask you're not for sure No i'm sure would you tell us if you were yes, okay uh Do you think it's a feature of bug that he's anonymous or she or they It's an interesting kind of quirk of human history that there is a particular technology that is a Completely anonymous inventor Or creator Well, I mean you can you can look at the um evolution of ideas um before the launch of bitcoin and See who wrote You know about those ideas um and then i like i don't know exactly i don't know who created but but coin for practical purposes The evolution of ideas is is pretty clear before that and like it seems as though like nixabo Probably more than anyone else Responsible for the evolution of those ideas So here he claims not to be so cut so so not commoto but i'm not sure that's that's neither here nor there uh but he he seems to be the one more Responsible for the ideas behind but quite anyone else So it's not perhaps like singular figures aren't even as important as the The figures involved in the evolution of ideas that led to a thing so yeah, yeah, it's you know And most perhaps it's sad to think about history, but maybe most names would be forgotten anyway What is the name anyway? It's a name name attached to an idea What does it mean really? I think Shakespeare had a thing about roses and stuff whatever he said Rose by any other name. It's well sweet I Got you on the quote Shakespeare. I feel I feel like I accomplished something today Show like a pali to a summer stay I'm gonna clip that out Um no more tempered animal fair Autopilot test a lot of um Does the autopilot has been through an incredible journey over the past six years Or perhaps even longer in the minds of in your mind in the minds of many involved Uh, I think that's where we first like connected really was the autopilot stuff autonomy and what's the whole journey was Incredible to me to watch I was um Because I knew well part of it as I was at MIT and I knew the difficulty of computer vision And I knew the whole I had a lot of colleagues and friends about the DARPA challenge and you how difficult it is And so there was a natural skepticism when I first drove a Tesla with uh the initial system based on mobile. I yeah I thought there's no way So first one I got in I thought there's no way this car could maintain Um like staying in lane and create a comfortable experience So my intuition initially was that the lane keeping problem is way too difficult to solve Oh, thank you. Yeah, that's really easy. Yeah, well yeah But like uh, but not the what's solved in the way that we just we talked about previous is prototype versus a thing that actually creates a pleasant experience over hundreds of thousands of miles or no Hey, yeah, so We had to wrap a lot of code around the mobile I think it doesn't just didn't just work by itself I mean that there's part that's part of the story of how you approach things sometimes sometimes you do things from scratch Sometimes the first you kind of see what's out there and then you decide different scratch That was one of the boldest decisions I've seen is both on the hardware and the software to decide to eventually go from scratch I thought again, I was skeptical whether that's going to be able to work out because it's such a such a difficult problem and so it was an incredible journey what I see now with um everything the hardware the compute the sensors the The things I maybe care and love about most is the the stuff that Andre Carpati is leading with the data sets selection the whole data engine process then you'll network architectures The way that's in the real world that network is tested validated all the different test sets You know versus the image net model of computer vision like what's in academia is like real world artificial intelligence so Andre is awesome and I was to play some important role, but we have a lot of really talented people driving things so And a show is actually the head of autopilot engineering Andre is director of AI AI stuff. Yeah, so yeah, there's I'm aware that there's an incredible team of just a lot going on Yeah, I just you know, I feel people will give off will give me too much credit and they'll give Andre too much credit so And people should realize how much is going on under the yeah, it's a lot of really talented people The tells the autopilot the IT is extremely talented. It's like some of the smartest people in the world um, so yeah, we're getting it done. What are some insights you've gained over those five six years of autopilot about the problem of a time was driving so you leaped in Having some sort of first principles kinds of intuitions, but nobody knows how difficult the Yeah, like I thought the self-driving problem would be hard, but it was harder than I thought so like I thought it'd be easy I thought it'd be very hard, but it was actually way harder than than even that so I want to come down to you at the end of the day is the soul self-driving You have to solve You you basically need to recreate What do what humans do to drive which is humans drive with optical sensors eyes and biological neural nets And so in order to that does how the entire road system is designed to work with with a basically passive optical and neural nets It biologically and now that we need to so for actually for full self-driving to work We have to recreate that in digital form So we have to That means cameras with advanced neural nets in silicon form And then you it will obviously solve for full self-driving. That's the only way. I don't think there's any other way But the question is what aspects of human nature do you have to encode into the machine? Right, so you have to solve the perception problem like detect And then you first or while it realize What is the perception problem for driving like all the kinds of things you have to be able to see like what what do we even look at when we drive There's uh, I just recently heard Andre talked about at MIT about like car doors I think it was the world's greatest talk of all time about car doors. Yeah The you know the fine details of car doors like what what is even an open car door man So like the the ontology of that that's the perception problem we human solve that perception problem Antesla has to solve that problem and then there's the control and the planning coupled with the perception yet to figure out like What's involved in driving like especially in all the different edge cases um, and then I mean Maybe you can comment on this How much game the erratic kind of stuff needs to be involved you know at a four-way stop sign You know are as humans when we drive our actions affect the world like sure it changes how others behave most of time was driving if you You're usually just responding To the scene as opposed to like really um asserting yourself in the scene. Do you think I think these so I think I think these could these sort of control control logic Conundrums are not come are not the hot part um The you know, let's see um What do you think is the hard part in this whole Um beautiful complex problem. So it's a lot of freaking software man a lot of smart lines of code um Uh for sure in order to have um Create an accurate vector space. Uh, so Like you you you're you're coming from image space Which is like this this flow of um photons cut you're going to camera cameras and uh and then uh So you have this massive boot stream um in an image space uh, and then you have to uh effectively compress uh the uh uh massive boot stream uh corresponding to photons that knocked off an electron in a camera sensor Uh and turn that put stream into into vector space um uh by by vector space. I mean like uh You know, you've got cars and and humans and uh lane lines and curves and uh traffic lights and that kind of thing um What once you uh have an accurate vector space um The control problem is So much that of a video game like a grand theft order of cyberpunk um if you have accurate accurate best vector space It's the control problem is It's it's it's it's trivial. It's not trivial but it's um Like it's it's it's it's it's it's not like some insurmountable thing. It's a so it's but having an accurate vector space It's very difficult. Yeah, I think we humans uh Don't give enough respect to how incredible the human perception system is to mapping the raw photons to the vector space representation in our heads Your brain is doing an incredible amount of processing um And giving you an image that is a very cleaned up image like when we look around here We seek like you see color in the corners of your eyes, but actually your eyes have very few uh uh cones like the Conor sectors in the peripheral vision Your your your eyes are painting color in the peripheral vision. You don't realize it, but their eyes are actually painting color and Your eyes also have like this blood vessels and also to gnarly things and there's a blind spot But do you see your blind spot? No, you're Your brain is painting in the missing the blind spot and you're gonna do these like See these things online where you look look here and look at this point and then look at this point And it's It's if it's in your blind spot it your brain will just fill in the The missing vessel the peripheral vision circle. Yeah, you realize all the illusions for vision science So it makes you realize just how incredible the brain is the brains don't crazy amount of post processing on the vision signals for your eyes um, it's insane so um And then even once you get all those vision signals Your your your brain is constantly trying to figure to forget as much as possible So human memory is Perhaps the weakest thing about the brain is memory so because memory is So expensive to a brain and so limited your brain is trying to forget as much as possible and to still the things that you see into The smallest the smallest amounts of information possible So brain is trying to not just get to a vector space But get to a vector space that is the smallest possible vector space of only relevant objects Um, and I think like You can sort of look inside your brain or at least I can like when you drive down the road and try to Think about what your brain is actually doing consciously And it's it's it's it's it's it's like you'll see a car that's You could because you're you're you don't have cameras you don't have eyes in the back of your head or inside You know, so you say like You basically your head is like a you know, you basically have like two cameras on a slow gimbal um and and what's you And I said something great. Okay, here and I is uh, you know like um and people constantly distracted and thinking about things and texting and doing Also things they shouldn't do in a car changing the radio station and so Having arguments, you know is like um So so then like say like like Uh Like when's the last time you look right and left and you know or and and rare word um or even diagonally You know forward To actually refresh your vector space So you're glancing around and what you're minus doing is is is trying to still um the relevant vectors basically objects with a position and motion uh and and then and then uh Editing that down to the least amount that's necessary for you to drive it does seem to be able to Uh, edit it down or compress it even further into things like concepts So it's not it's like it goes beyond the human mind seems to go sometimes beyond vector space To sort of space of concepts to where you you'll see a thing. It's no longer represented spatially somehow It's almost like a concept that you should be aware of like if this is a school zone You'll remember that yeah as a concept which is a weird thing to represent but perhaps for driving you don't Need to fully represent those things or maybe you get those kind of um Well, you indirectly you need it's like a salvage vector space and then Actually have predictions for uh that those vector spaces so like um you know like if uh You know like you drive past say say uh Abus and then and you see that this There's people before you drove past the bus you saw people were crossing It's like or some just imagine there's like a large truck or something blocking site um But you before you came up to the truck you saw that there were some kids about to cross the road In front of the truck now you can no longer see the kids, but you you need to be able but you would now know Okay, those kids are probably gonna pass by the truck and cross the road Even though you cannot see them so you have to have um memory That you have to need to remember that there were kids there and you need to have some forward prediction of what their position will be really hard problem at the time of relevance so with with occlusions And computer vision when you can't see an object anymore Even when it just walks behind a tree and reappears. That's a really really I mean at least in academic literature Tracking through occlusions. It's very difficult. Yeah, we're doing it. Um, I understand this yeah So some of it it's like object permanence like same thing happens with the humans with your neural nets like if it when like a toddler grows up like there's a there's a point in time where Uh, they develop they have a sense of object permanence. So before a certain age if you have a ball Uh, or a toy or whatever and you put it behind your back and you pop it out If they don't before they have object permanence, it's like a new thing every time. It's like whoa this Toya went boof just spared and now it's back again and they can't believe it and that they can play peekaboo all day long because the peekaboo is fresh every time But then we figured out object permanence then they realized oh no the object is not gone. It's just behind you back Um, sometimes I wish we never did figure out object permanence Yeah, so that's uh That's an important problem to solve Yes, so so in an like an important evolution of the neural nets in the car is uh um Memory a car memory across both time and space um, so Uh, now you can't remember like you have to say like how long do you want to remember things for and and it's There's a cost to remembering things for a long time So you could you know like run out of memory to try to remember too much for too long Um, and then you also have things that are stale if if they're From remember for too long and then you also need things that are remember Remember it over time so even if you like say have like For I'm gonna say five seconds of memory on a time basis But like let's say you you you're parked at a light and you and you saw You used a pedestrian example that people were waiting to cross the Across the road and you can't you can't quite see them because I'm an occlusion Uh, but they might wait for a minute before the light changes for them to cross the road You still need to remember that they that that's where they were Um, and that they're probably going to cross the road type of thing um, so even if that exceeds your Your time-based memory should not exceed your space of memory And I just think the data engine side of that so getting the data to learn all of the concepts that you're saying now Is an incredible process. It's this iterative process of just it's this this hydrant of many I should know We're changing the name to something else. Okay. I'm sure it'll be equally as Yeah Rick and Morty like there's a lot of it. Yeah, yeah, we've we all detected the neural net Uh, neural nets in the cars so many times it's crazy Also every time there's a new major version you'll rename it to something more ridiculous or I or memorable and beautiful. Sorry now ridiculous of course If you if you see the full the full like a ray of neural nets that that operatingly cars it's kind of boggles the mind This so there's so many layers. It's crazy um so Yeah um, but and we we saw it off with uh Simple neural nets that were uh basically It image recognition on a single frame from a single camera and then Trying to net those together with it you know it with the c I should say we were really primarily running c here because c++ is uh So it's too much overhead and we have our own c compiler So to get maximum performance we actually wrote wrote our own c compiler and are continuing to optimize our c compiler for Maximum efficiency in fact we've just recently Uh done a new rev on on a on a c compiler that'll compile directly to our autopilot hardware Um, do you want to compile the whole thing down and with your own compiler? Yeah, like so efficiently here The good because there's all kinds of compute their CPU GPU. There's like the basic types of things That's and you have to somehow figure out the scheduling across all of those things and so you're compiling the code down Yeah, it does all the okay This is so that's why there's a lot of people involved This is this is a lot of hardcore uh software engineering at a very sort of Bare metal level Because you we're trying to do a lot of compute uh that's constrained to the You know our full self-driving computer. So and we want to try to have the highest frames per second possible With in a sort of very finite amount of compute um and power so um We really put a lot of effort into the efficiency of our compute um And uh, so there's actually a lot of work done by It's a very talented software engineers at Tesla that uh at a very foundational level to improve the efficiency of compute and how we use the The tripe accelerators which are basically um um Dot you know uh during matrix math dot dot products like a Brazilian dot products You know and it's like what what what what are neural assets like compute wise like 99% dot products so You know um and you want to achieve as many high frame rates like video game you want yeah for full resolution High frame rate high frame rate low latency um low jitter uh so um um I think one of the things we're um moving towards now is no post processing of the image through the um uh the image signal processor so um Like for what happens for cameras is that what almost look cameras is they um That there's a lot of post processing done in order to make pictures look pretty Uh, and so we don't care about pictures looking pretty um We we just want the data We so we're we're moving to just roll roll photon counts So the system will Like the Image that That the computer sees is actually much more than what each see if you're represented on a camera. Let's go much more data Uh, and even in very low light conditions You can see that there's a small photon count difference between You know the spot here and that's about there which means that so it can see in the dark incredibly well Um because it can detect these tiny differences in photon counts That's much better than you'd put possibly imagine um so and then we also save uh 13 milliseconds on a latency uh so Um from removing the post processing and the image. Yes. Yeah. It's like um Because we've got you know eight cameras and and then there's uh Roughly I don't know one half milliseconds also Maybe 1.6 milliseconds of latency um For each camera and so it like uh um Going to just uh It basically bypassing the image processor uh gets us back 13 milliseconds of latency which is important um And we track latency all the way from you know photon hits the the camera to You know all the steps that it's gonna go through to get you go through the um The various neural nets and the the C code and And there's a little bit of C++ there as well um Well, I can maybe a lot but it the core stuff is it the heavy-duty computer's all in C um And uh And so so we track that latency all the way to an output command to the um Drive you know to accelerate uh the brakes just to slow down steering your turn left or right um So because you got to output a command that's gonna go to controller and like some of these controllers have an update frequency That's maybe uh ten hertz or something like that which is slow. That's like now you lose 100 milliseconds potentially so So then we want to update the The drivers on the Like say it's steering and braking control to have um More like uh Outer towards instead of ten hosts and you got a ten milliseconds latency instead of 100 milliseconds worst case latency And actually jitter is more of a challenge than than latency because latency is like you can you can You can't just pay to predict but if you But if you've got a stack up of things going from the camera to the to the computer Through then a series of other computers and finally to an actuator on the to the car if you have a stack up of Of tolerances of timing tolerances, then you can have quite a variable latency which school jitter And and that makes it a hard to To anticipate exactly what how you should turn the car or accelerate because you know if you got maybe 150 turn-off milliseconds of jitter then you could be off by you know about to point two seconds And this can make this could make a big difference So you have to interpolate somehow to to to uh deal with the effects of jitter so the they can make like robust control decisions Yeah, you have to so the jitter is in the sensor information always the jitter can occur at any stage in the pipeline You can if you have just if you have fixed latency you can anticipate um And and like say okay, we know that uh Our information is for argument sake 150 milliseconds stale Like so for 140 more for argument sake 150 milliseconds from Photos taken camera to Where you can measure a change in the acceleration of the vehicle So then uh then you can say okay, well we're gonna And so we know it's 150 milliseconds, so we're gonna take that into account and uh And compensate for that latency however if you if you got then 150 milliseconds of latency plus 100 milliseconds of jitter That's which could be anywhere from zero zero to 100 milliseconds on top So so then your latency could be from 150 to 50 milliseconds now you got 100 milliseconds that you don't know what to do with and uh that's basically random So getting rid of jitter is extremely important And that affects your control decisions and all those kinds of things Okay Yeah, the cars is gonna fundamentally maneuver better with lower jitter um Got it The the the cause will maneuver with superhuman ability and reaction time much faster than a human I mean, I think over time the It tells the autopilot full-stop driving will be capable of maneuvers that um you know You know are far more than what like James Bond could do and like in the best movie type of thing That's exactly where I was imagining in my mind as you said it It's like an impossible maneuver that a human couldn't do you know, so Well, let me ask sort of uh looking back the six years looking out into the future Based on your current understanding how hard do you think this this full self-driving problem when do you think Tesla will solve level 4 fsd? I mean, it's looking quite likely that it will be next year And what is the solution look like is it the current pool of fsd beta candidates They start getting greater and greater as they have been degrees of autonomy and then there's a certain level beyond which They can they can they can do their own they can read a book Yeah, so uh I mean you can see that anybody who's been falling the full-stop driving beta closely um we'll see that the um The rated disengagement has been dropping rapidly So like a disengagement beware where the driver intervenes to prevent the car from doing something right uh dangerous potentially so um So the interventions You know per a million miles has been dropping dramatically at some point the And that trend looks like it it happens next year is That the probability of an accident on fsd is Less than that of the average human and then and then significantly less than that of the average human um so It suddenly appears like we will get there next year um Then of course that that then there's going to be a case of okay will we not prove the straggulators and prove it to you know And and we we want a standard that is not just equivalent to a human but Uh much better than the average human. I think it's got to be at least two or three times uh higher Safety than a human so two or three times lower probability of injury than a human Um before before we would actually say like okay, it's okay to go. It's it's not gonna be a cool. It's got to be much better So if you look uh 10 point the fsd 10.6 just came out recently 10.7s on the way Maybe 11 is on the way so we're in the future. Yeah, um we were hoping to get 11 out this year, but it's uh Yeah, 11 actually has a whole bunch of uh fundamental rewrites on the neural neural net architecture um and some fundamental improvements uh in creating vector space uh so There is a some fundamental like leap that really deserves the 11. I mean, that's a pretty cool number. Yeah, you know 11 would be uh a single stack for all you know one stack to rule them all um and uh But there they're just some really fundamental uh Neural net architecture changes that that are that that will allow for uh Much more capability, but but you know at first they're gonna have issues so like we have this working on like sort of alpha software and it's good but it's uh It's basically taking a whole bunch of cc++ code and and and leading a massive amount of c++ code and replacing it with the neural net and you know Andrei makes this point a lot which is like neural net's a kind of eating software You know over time there's like Less and less conventional software more and more neural net. We were just a software, but it's you know Still comes out to line software, but uh let's it's more more neural net stuff unless uh You know hewrest x basically um If you're more more more matrix-based stuff unless uh hewrestx-based stuff um and um You know like like like one of the big changes will be um Like right now the neural nets uh will um Deliver a giant bag of points Uh to the c++ or cnc++ code um We call it the giant bag of points And it's like so you go to pixel and and and and Something associated with that pixel like this pixel is probably car that was pixel is probably lane line um then you've got to assemble this giant bag of points in the ccode and turn it into uh vectors um And uh does a pretty good job of it, but it's uh it's We want to just we need another layer of neural net on top of that to take the the giant bag of points and distill that down to vector space in the in the neural net part of the software as opposed to the hewrestx part of the software This is a big improvement um you know and that's all the way down. So you want it's not even your only neural net but it's it's uh this will be just a get this is a game changer to not have the bag of points The giant bag of points that has to be assembled with uh many lines of cc++ uh and and have the And have a neural net just assemble those into vectors. So so the the the neural net is outputting um Much much less data. It's it's it's outputting this this is a lane line. This is a curb. This is drivable space. This is a card. This is uh uh, you know Pedestrian or cyclist or something like that. It's outputting um It's really out outputting um prop proper vectors to the the cc++ control control code as opposed to the sort of constructing the the vectors uh in in c um We've done i think quite a good job of but it's it's a it we've kind of hitting a local maximum on the how well the c can do this um So this is this is really this is really a big deal and and just all of the networks in the car need need to move to surround video This is some legacy networks that are not uh surround video um At all of the training needs to move to surround video and the efficiency of the training uh it needs to get better and it is And then we need to move everything to uh raw photon counts as opposed to um processed images. Yeah, so it's just quite a big reset on the training because the system is trained on post processed image images So we need to redo all the training uh To train against the the raw photon counts instead of the post processed image So ultimately it's kind of reducing the complexity of the whole thing. So uh reducing reducing the lines of code will actually go go lower. Yeah, that's fascinating um So you're doing fusion of all the sensors so reducing the complexity of having to deal with each of the cameras as like cameras really right. Yes um same with humans uh well, I guess we got ears too. Okay. Yeah, well, we'll actually need to incorporate um sound as well Because you know, you need to like listen for ambulance siren so far, you know, fire trucks, put you know uh if If somebody like You know yelling at you or something. I don't just that there's that there's a little bit of audio that needs to be incorporated as well Do you need to go back to break? Yeah, we listen to sure. Let's take a break. Okay Honestly, frankly Like the ideas are the easy thing and the implementation is the hot thing like the idea of going to the moon is Is the easy part but going to the moon is the hot pot is the hard part um and there's a lot of like hardcore ensuring that's going to get done At the hardware and software level uh, like sit optimizing the see compiler and uh just you know uh Kind of out late and see Everywhere Like this is We don't do this assistant if we're not work properly um, so The work of the engineers doing this they are like the unsigned heroes to some you know But they are critical to the success of the situation. I think you made it clear I mean at least to me it's super exciting everything that's going on outside of What Andrei's doing? Yeah, just the whole infrastructure the software I mean everything is going on with data engine uh whatever whatever it's called The whole process is just yeah I think we've already missed the sheer scale of it is it's bogus mind like the training at the amount of work done with the like we've written all this Custom software for training and labeling Um and to do auto labeling auto labeling is essential um Because especially when you got like surround video It's very difficult to like label surround video from scratch is extremely difficult um Like take a human's such a long time to even label one video clip like several hours Uh or the order label it Basically we just apply a heavy like heavy duty uh Like a lot of compute to the to the video clips um To pre-assign and guess what all the things are that are going on in the surround video and then there's like correcting it Yeah, then the then all the human has to just like tweet like say the you know chant adjust what is incorrect This is like Increases increases productivity by effect 100 or more Yeah, so you've presented test the bot as primarily useful in the factory first of all I think human robots are incredible from a fan of robotics I think uh the elusive movement that human The human robots that bipedal robots show are just so cool So it's uh really interesting that you're working on this and also talking about applying the same kind of All the ideas of some of which we've talked about with data engine all the things that we're talking about with test lot of pilot Just uh transfer that over to the just yet another robotics problem I have to ask since I care about human robot interaction so the human side of that so you've talked about mostly in the factory Do you see it? Uh also do you see part of this problem that test the bot has to solve is interacting with humans and potentially having a place like in the home So interacting majesty sure not replacing labor, but also like I don't know well being a friend or or an assistant. Yeah, I think the the possibilities are Yeah endless Yeah, I mean it's it's obviously like a it's not quite in tells those primary mission direction of accelerating sustainable energy, but It is a an extremely useful thing that we can do for the world which is to make a useful humanoid robot um that is capable of interacting with the world and um Helping in many different ways uh, so So in fact reason and I really just just I mean I think if you say like uh Extrapolate to you know many years in the future. It's like I think uh work will become optional So Like there's a lot of jobs that if you're If people weren't paid to do it, they they wouldn't do it like it's not it's not fun, you know necessarily like If you're washing dishes all day, it's like, uh, you know Even if you really like washing dishes, you really want to do it for eight hours a day every day. Probably not so Um, and then it's like dangerous work and basically if it's dangerous boring Uh, it has like potential for repetitive stress injury that kind of thing um Then that's really where Humanoid robots would add the most value initially Um, so that's what aiming for is is to um For the humanoid robots to do jobs that people don't don't voluntarily want to do Um, and then that we'll have to pair that obviously with some kind of universal basic basic income in the future So I think um So do you see a world when there's like hundreds of millions of Tesla bots Doing different performing different tasks throughout the world Yeah, I haven't really thought about it that far in the future, but I guess that there may be something like that um, so Guess a wild question So the the number of Tesla cars has been accelerating has been close to two million produced many of them have auto Pilot I think we're over two million now. Yeah. Do you think there will ever be a time when there'll be more Tesla bots Then Tesla cars Yeah, I You know actually it's for your subscription because normally I do try to think I'm pretty far into the future But I haven't really thought that far into the future With the Or it's codenade Optimus I call Optimus subprime So it's not so like a giant you know transformer robot So But it's meant to be a general purpose help help or bot um And and basically like like the things that we're basically Like like Tesla I think Is the has the most advanced real world AI Uh for interacting with the real world which should develop the selection of it to to make self-driving work um, and so Along with custom hardware and like a lot of you know Hardcore low-level software to have it run efficiently and be you know power efficient because you know It's one thing to do neural nets if you got a gigantic sober room with 10,000 computers, but now let's say you just you have to now just So that down into one computer that's running at low power in a humanoid robot or a car Um, that's actually very difficult and a lot of hardcore software work is required for that um So so since we're kind of like solving the navigate the real world With neural nets problem for Cars which are kind of like robots with four wheels then it's like kind of a natural extension of that is to Put it in a robot with arms and legs uh An actual you know actuators um so um Like like the the two Like hard things are like you basically need to make the How the row of being intelligent enough to interact in a sensible way with the environment um So you need real real world AI and you need to be very good at um manufacturing which is a very hard problem tells us very good at manufacturing and also has the real world AI So making the humanoid robot work is uh basically means developing custom Motors and sensors Uh that that are different for a car would use um But we we're also we have a um I think we have the the best expertise in Developing advanced electric motors and power electronics. So It just has to be for humanoid robot application or a car Still you do talk about love sometimes So let me ask this isn't like for like sex robots or something like that. I love it's the answer yes uh There is something compelling To us not compelling but we connect with um humanoid robots or even like a robot like with the dog and shapes the dogs It just it seems like you know, there's a huge amount of loneliness in this world All of us seek companionship and with other humans friendship and all those kinds of things We have a lot of here in Austin a lot of people have dogs So um there seems to be a huge opportunity to also have robots that decrease the uh The amount of loneliness in the world or help us humans connect with each other So in the way the dogs can Um, do you think about that? Would test about it all or is it really focused on the problem of of performing specific tasks not connecting with humans? um I mean to be honest, I have not actually thought about it from the companion chip standpoint But I think it actually would end up being it could be actually a very good companion um And it could I it you develop like a personality uh Over time that is that is like unique like uh, you know, it's not like they're just all the robots are the same and that personality could evolve to be you know Match the the the owner or the you know, I guess The owner uh well I want if you want to call it uh the other companion the other half right The same way the friends do see I think that's a huge opportunity. I think yeah, no, that's interesting like um The because you know like there's a japanese phrasal like the Wabi Sabi, you know, uh the subtle imperfections or what makes something special And the subtle imperfections of the personality the robot mapped to the subtle imperfections of the robot's human And Friend don't know owner sounds like maybe the wrong word but um Could actually make an incredible buddy basically and in that way the imperfections or like a see through pio sort of thing You know so from a machine learning perspective I think the flaws being a feature is really nice. You could be quite terrible at being a robot for quite a while In the general home environment or all the in general world and that's kind of adorable And that's like those are your flaws and you fall in love with those flaws So it's it's a very different than autonomous driving where it's a very high-stakes environment you cannot mess up And so it's yeah, it's more fun to be a robot in the home Yeah, in fact if you think of like see through pio and R2D2 yeah like they actually had a lot of like flaws and imperfections and silly things and They would argue with each other And um, were they actually good at doing anything? Exactly sure. I definitely added a lot to the story um But but but there's there's sort of quirky elements and You know That they would like make mistakes and do you think it like it was like uh it made them relatable, I don't know um Enduring So so yeah, I think that that could be something that probably would happen um But our initial focus is just to make it useful so um I'm confident we'll get it done. I'm not sure what the exact time frame is but uh Like we'll probably have I don't know a decent prototype Towards the end of next year or something like that And it's cool that it's connected to Tesla the car This so so yeah, it's it's using a lot of you know, it would use the autopilot inference computer and Um a lot of the training that we've done for the for cars in terms of recognizing Real world things could be applied directly to the To the robot um So it but but there's there's a lot of custom actuators and sensors that need to be developed And an extra module on top of the vector space for love Oh, yeah, that's me Okay, we're going back to the car too That's true um That could be useful in all environments like you said a lot of people argue in the car so maybe we can help them out Uh your student of history fan of Dan Carlin's hardcore history podcast. Yeah, it's great greatest podcast ever Yeah, I think it probably it's actually I know it doesn't it almost doesn't really count as a podcast. Yeah, it's so good. It's more like a audiobook Yeah, so you were on the podcast with dad just had a chat with him about it He said you guys want military and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, it's certainly it was basically um Uh It should be titled engineer wars uh essentially like like when there's a rapid change in the rate of technology then Engineering plays a pivotal role in in victory and battle um Do you get how far back in history did you go to go over to uh it was mostly more well It was supposed to be a deep dive on fighters and bomber Technology in world war two, but then ended up being more wide-ranging than that um Because I just went down the atola rathole of like studying all of the the fighters and bombers of world war two and like the constant rock paper says this game that like you know Uh one country make this plan that I make it to plan to beat that and that But I may claim to be that and then the And really what matters like the pace of innovation um and also access to high quality uh fuel and uh roamed turtles So like journey had like some amazing designs, but they couldn't make them uh because they couldn't get their uh roamed turtles uh and They had a real problem with the oil and and uh fuel basically the fuel quality was extremely variable So the design wasn't the bottleneck is uh, yeah like the US head kickass fuel uh that was like very Consistent like the problem is if you make a very high performance aircraft engine Um in order to make high performance you have to um the the The fuel the aviation gas uh has to be a consistent mixture and uh It has to have a high octane um But like high octane is the most important thing, but also can't have like impurities and stuff Uh because you'll you'll fall up the engine And and and German just never had good access oil like they tried to get it by invading the cocosis Um, but that didn't work too well That never works well Uh, yeah, yeah That's that's for you So there always was journey was always struggling with with basically shitty oil um as then they could not uh, they they couldn't count on a on high quality fuel for their aircraft So then they had to add all the heavily additives and and stuff uh, so um Uh, where it was the US had awesome fuel um and that provided that to Britain as well um so That allowed the British and the Americans to design aircraft engines that were Super high performance better than anything else in the world And German Germany could could could design the engines to just didn't have the fuel uh and then also the what likes that the Uh the quality of the aluminum allies that they were getting was also not that great And so yeah, is this like uh do you talk about all this with Dan? Yeah, awesome broadly looking at history when you look at jengus con when you look at Stalin Hitler the darkest moments of human history Uh, what do you take away from those moments does it help you gain insight about human nature about human behavior today Whether it's the wars or the individuals or just the behavior of people and the aspects of history Yeah, I find history fascinating um Um I'm just a lot of incredible things that have been done good and bad um that they help you just help you understand the nature of civilization um and individuals and Does it make you sad that humans do these kinds of things to each other you look at the 20th century world war two The cruelty the abuse of power talk about communism Marxism and Stalin um i mean some of these things do i mean if you Like there's a lot of human history um, but most of it is actually people just getting on with their lives uh, you know and and it's not like human history is just what nonstop war and Disaster is that those are actually just those are intermittent and rare and if they weren't then The you know humans would soon cease to exist um Uh, but it's just that wars tend to be written about a lot and whereas like uh Something being like will a no normal year where nothing major happened was just getting ridden about much but that's You know most people just like farming and Kind of like living their life, you know um being a belliger. It's somewhere um And every now and again there's a war and i think so um And um you know what i have to say like The There aren't very many books that i where i just had to stop reading because it was just too too dark but The book about Stalin the quarter of the reds are I had could I had to start reading it was just too too bad or dark rough yeah The thirties There's a lot a lot of lessons there to me it in particular that it feels like Humans like all of us have that as the old soldier needs in line um That the line between good and evil runs to the hard-never man that all of us are capable of evil all of us are capable of good It's almost like this kind of responsibility that um all of us have to to To tend towards the good and so like to me looking at history is almost like an example of look you have some charismatic leader that uh Convinces you of things is too easy Based on that story to do evil onto each other onto your family and other others And so it's like our responsibility to do good It's not like now is somehow different from history that can happen again all of it can happen again And yes most of the time you're right i mean the optimistic view here is Mostly people are just living life and as you've often meamed about The quality of life was way worse back in the day and keeps improving over time through innovation to technology But still it's somehow notable that these blimps of Atrocities happen sure Yeah, I mean life was really tough Most of history um i mean really for most of human history um A good year would be one where not that many people in your village died of the plague Stovation Freezing to death or being killed by a neighboring village It's like well it wasn't that bad you know was only like you know we lost five percent this year that's Yeah, it was good here. You know that would be proper the course Like just just not starving to death would have been like the primary goal of most people in through it throughout history Is making sure we'll have enough foods last with the winter and not get in our trees or whatever so um Now food is is plan a full we have an obesity problem You know so Well, yeah the lesson there is to be grateful for the way things are now for for some of us We've spoken about the soft line I'd love to get your thought about it here If I sat down for a long form in-person conversation with the president of Russia Vladimir Putin Would you potentially want to call in for a few minutes Uh to join in on a conversation with him moderated and translated by me Sure, yeah, sure I'd be happy to do that You've shown interest in the Russian language is this grounded in your interest in history of linguistics culture General curiosity I think it sounds cool Sounds cool and that looks cool so Well, it's you know, it's it's a It takes a moment to read Cyrillic um What once you know what the Cyrillic Character is stand for actually then reading Russian becomes a lot easier because there are a lot of words that are actually the same like bank is bank And uh So find the words they exactly the same and now you start to understand Cyrillic Yeah, if you can if you can sound it out Uh The it's much this at least some commonality of words. What about the culture You uh you love great engineering physics. There's a tradition of the sciences there. Sure. We look at the 20th century from rocketry So you know some of the greatest rockets of the space exploration has been done in the Soviet and the former Soviet Union Yeah, so do you draw inspiration from That history just how this culture that in many ways I mean one of the sad things is because of the language A lot of it is lost to history because it's not translated to all those kinds of because it it is in some ways an isolated culture It flourishes within is within is borders Yeah, so do you draw inspiration from those folks from from the history of yeah science engineering there I mean the Soviet Union Russia and uh Ukraine as well and Have a really strong history in space flight like some of the most advanced and impressive things in history were done You know by the server-gunian um so Um One can cannot help but admire the impressive rocket technology that was developed um You know after the so full of the Soviet Union the There there's The there's much less that that that happened um but uh Still things are happening but it's not not quite at the frenetic pace that was happening uh Before the Soviet Union kind of It dissolved into separate to reflux Yeah, I mean, I you know there's Roskotsk most of Russian the agency. I um I look forward to a time when those countries with China working together Uh, you in the United States they're all working together. Maybe a little bit of friendly competition, but like friendly competition is good um You know, you got a government so slow and the only thing slower than one government is a collection of governments So yeah the Olympics would be boring if everyone just crossed the finishing line at the same time. Yeah, nobody would watch Yeah And and who wouldn't try hard to run fast and stuff. So I think friendly competition is good thing Uh, this is also a good place to give a shout out to a video title the entire Soviet rocket engine family tree by Tim Dodd aka everyday astronaut. It's like an hour and a half. It gives a full history of uh Soviet rockets And people should definitely go check out and support him in general that guy is super excited about the future Super excited about space flight every time I see anything by I might just have a stupid smile on my face Because he's so excited about stuff. Yeah, Tim Dodd is a really really great. If you're interested in anything to do a space He's in terms of explaining rocket technology to your average person. He's awesome the best I'd say And um I should say like the Part of reason like uh, I switched us from Like we're after at one point. There's gonna be a hydrogen engine um But hydrogen has a lot of challenges. It's very low density. It's a deep cryogen. So it's only liquid at a very You're very close to absolute zero requires a lot of insulation. It's um So it is a lot of a lot of challenges there um and um And I was actually reading a bit about uh Russian rocket engine development and um At least the impression I had was that that uh or so it was so a junior Russia and Ukraine uh primarily were uh actually in the process of uh switching to methalox um and there was some interesting test and data for ISP like they were able to get like up to like a three hundred eighty second ISP with uh Metalox engine and I was like well, okay, that's That's actually really impressive. So um So I think we could you could actually get Is um and much lower cost like in optimizing cost pretend to over at cost pretend to Mars um It's uh, I think um Methane oxygen is the way to go um and I was partly inspired by the Russian work on the test ends uh With methalox engines And now for something completely different Do you mind doing a uh a bit of a meme review in the spirit of the great the powerful beauty pie Let's say one to eleven just go over a few documents printed out We can try let's try this I present to you document number uno I don't know okay Flat-dane paler discovers marshmallows That's not bad So Get it because uh yes, I got you're failing things Yes, I got it. I don't know three but uh that's not very good This is um ground in some engineering some history Uh Ha ha yeah, give us an eight out of ten What do you think about nuclear power? I'm in favor of nuclear power. I think it's uh I in a place that is not subject to extreme natural disasters. I think it's a nuclear power is a great way to generate electricity Um, I don't I don't think we should be shutting down nuclear power stations Yeah, but what about your novel exactly So Uh, I think people that there's like a lot of fear of radiation and stuff um And it's I guess what probably is like a lot of people just don't Understood I'd even study Engineering or physics so they're not it's who is the word radiation just sounds scary, you know So they don't they can't calibrate what radiation means um But radiation is much less dangerous than than than you think um So um Like for example Fukushima, you know um When the Fukushima problem happened To the tsunami the I got people in California asking me if they should worry about radiation From Fukushima. I'm like definitely not not even slightly not at all that is crazy um and just to Show like look this is how Like the dangers is so much overplayed compared to what what it really is that I actually flew to Fukushima and I actually I donated a A solar power system for water treatment plant and uh And I made a point of eating locally grown vegetables um On TV in Fukushima Like I'm still alive. Okay It's not even at the risk of these events as low but the impact of them is The impact is greatly exaggerated. It's just great. It's just great. It's human nature It's people don't know what radiation is like I've had people ask me like what about radiation from cell phones According causing brain cancer. I'm like we say radiation. Do you mean photons or particles? than like that I don't know what would you mean photons particles? Do you mean uh Let's say photons what what frequency or wavelength and they're like no idea um Like do you know that everything's radiating all the time Like what do you mean like yeah everything's radiating all the time Photons are being emitted by by all objects all the time basically so um And she want to know what it's it's what what it means to stand in front of nuclear fire Go outside The Sun is a gigantic You know thermonuclear reactor you're staring right at it Yeah, I used to live. Yes. Okay. Amazing Yeah, I guess radiation is one of the words that could be used as uh as a tool to to to fear monger by certain people That's it. I think I'll just don't understand So I mean that's the way to fight that uh that fear I suppose just to understand is to learn Yeah, just say like okay. How many people have actually died from nuclear accidents? It's like practically nothing and Uh say how many people have have died from You know coal plants and it's a very big number so Like obviously we should not be starting up coal plants and shutting down nuclear plants just doesn't make any sense at all coal plants like I don't know 100 to a thousand times worse for for health and nuclear power plants Ah, you want to go to the next one? This is really bad So that uh 90 180 and 360 degrees everybody loves the math nobody gives a shit about to 70 It's not super funny I don't like two or three. Yeah, um, this is not uh, you know Hello, what else situation? Yeah It's pretty good the United States oscillating between establishing and destroying dictatorships. It's like uh Metrics, isn't it? Yeah, what does that mean? Yeah, yeah, it's uh out of seven out ten. It's kind of true. Oh, yeah, this is uh This is kind of personal for me next one Oh, man, this is like a yeah, well no, this is like referring to like or something as like as like as like Uh husband husband. Yeah. Yeah. Hello. Yes. This is dog your wife was launched to space and then the last one Is him with his eyes closed in the bottle of vodka? Yeah, like it didn't come back. No I don't tell you the full story of you know what what the love the impact they had on the loved ones Yeah, true that won't get an 11 for me. Sure. So this show uh, yeah, this keeps going on the Russian theme First man in space nobody cares first man in the moon. Well, I think people do care. No, I know, but um I there's your gaga and snails will will will be forever in history. I think there is something special about placing like stepping foot onto another surely foreign land It's it's not the journey like uh people that explore the oceans. It's not as important to explore the oceans is to land in a whole new continent Yeah, this is about you Oh, yeah, I'd love to get your comment on this y'all must After sending six point six billion dollars to the UN to end world hunger you have three hours um You know, I mean obviously six billion dollars darker and will do hunger so um So I mean the reality is at this point the world is producing Far more food than it can really consume it like we don't have a caloric uh Constraint to this point so where there is hunger it is almost always due to um It's like like civil war or strife or some like um It's it's not a thing that is It extremely rare for it to be just a matter of like lack of money. It's like You know, it's like some To the civil war in some some country and then like one part of the country's literally trying to starve the other part of the country um So it's much more complex than something that money could solve it's politics. It's It's a lot of things. It's human nature. It's governments. It's money's monitor systems all that kind of stuff Yeah, food is extremely cheap these days. It's like it's I mean the US at this point um You know among low-income families obesity is actually now the problem. It's not Like obviously it's it's not hunger. It's it's like too much you know too many calories. Uh, so I said it's not that nobody's hungry anywhere. It's just it's just this is uh Not not a simple matter of adding money and solving it Hmm What do you think that one gets this getting to Just going after empire's world uh, where did you get those artifacts the British Museum It shut out to Antipython we found them Yeah, the rich uh the museum is it's pretty great. I mean yeah It admittedly Britain did take uh these historical artifacts from all around the world and put them in London, but uh You know, it it it's not like people can't go see them uh, so it is a it can be in a place to see these Ancient artifacts is is London for You know for for large segment of the world So I think you know on balance the British Museum is a net good Although I've showed the lot of countries are all about that. Yeah It's like you want to make these historical artifacts accessible to as many people as possible and the British Museum I think there's a good job of that Even if there's a darker aspect to like the history of empire in general whatever the empire is however things were done It is the history that happened you can't sort of erase that history unfortunately you could just become better in the future It's the point Yeah, I mean It's like well, how are we gonna pass moral judgment on these these things like it's like if you uh You know If one is gonna judge say the version empire you got to judge you know Whatever one was doing at the time and how were the British relative to everyone um And I think they were first would actually get like a relatively good grade relatively good grade not an absolute terms, but compared to whatever else was doing um The they were not the worst like said you gotta look at these things in the context of the history at the time And say what were what were the alternatives and what are you comparing it against yes, and I'd I do not think it would be the case that Britain would get a bad grade in when looking at history at the time No, if you judge history from You know From what is morally acceptable today you're basically gonna give everyone a feeling great. Yeah, I'm not clear So I don't think anyone would get a passing grade um in their morality of like you go back 300 years ago Like who's getting a passing grade? Oh basically no one And we might not get a passing grade from generations that uh the comatress Uh, what does that one get uh Sure, uh, success seven seven for the mighty python maybe uh, those are mighty python their great Uh, Ryan and the quest for holy grail are incredible Yeah, yeah, yeah, those suicide bras Brazen of Tell like you know how important you think is facial hair to uh to great leadership Well, you got a new haircut is that is that is it how does that affect your leadership? I don't know hopefully not It doesn't um Yeah, the second is no one There's no like feeding the president no into those are like epic eyebrows So Ah, it's ridiculous. Give it a six or seven. I don't know. Uh, I like this like Shakespeare analysis of memes I personally had a had a flare for drama as well Like you know, showmanship. Yeah, yeah, it must come from the eyebrows. All right, um Invention great engineering look what I invented. Yeah, that's the best thing since ripped up bread. Yeah, okay I just Slice bread am I just explaining memes at this point? This will my life has become um He's gonna be more than you explain. I'm a meme what it like a you know like a scribe that like runs around with the kings and just like writes down memes. I mean, when was a cheeseburger in venture? That's like an epic invention. Yeah, like Like wow You know that was just like a burger or a burger. I guess a burger in general. It's like you know Um, then there's like what is a burger? What's what's a sandwich and then you start getting yeah, it's a pizza sandwich and what is the original? It's it's it gets into an ontology argument Yeah, but everybody knows like if you order like a burger or cheeseburger or whatever and you like you get like you know Tomato and some lettuce and onions and whatever and you know Mayer and ketchup and mustard. It's like epic Yeah, but I'm sure they've had bread and meat separately for a long time and it was kind of a burger on the same plate But somebody who actually combined them into the same thing Yeah, the bite and hold it make makes it convenient. It's a materials problem. Yeah, your hands don't get dirty and whatever. Yeah, it's Well, that is not what I would have guessed But everyone knows like you you like you if you order a cheeseburger, you know, where you're getting you know It's not like some obtuse like I wonder what I'll get you know You know, uh fries are I mean Great I mean that was a devil but fries are awesome um and uh Yeah, pizza is incredible Food innovation doesn't get enough love. Yeah, I guess is what we're getting at Great um Uh, what about the uh Matthew McConney Austinite here President Kennedy do you know how to put men on the moon yet? Now some though president Kennedy Be a lot cooler if you did Pretty much sure six six or seven. That's This is the last one. That's funny Someone drew a bunch of takes all over the walls, assisting chapel boys bathroom. Sure. I'll give it nine It's super as it's really true All right, this is our highest ranking meme for today. I mean, it's true like how did they get away with that? Lots of nakedness I mean dick pics are I mean just something throughout history Uh as long as people can draw things, there's been a dick pic. It's the staple of human history. It's a staple Consistence throughout human history You you tweeted that you aspire to comedy your friends with Joe Rogan might you do a short stand-up comedy set at some point in the future Maybe um open for Joe something like that is that is that really stand-up actual just belong stand-up for long stand-up is that in there or is that I've never thought about that Um, it's extremely difficult if at least that's what like Joe says in the comedian say Oh, I wonder if I could um I mean like one way to find out You know, I have done stand-up for friends just uh in prompt to You know, I'll get get on like a roof uh, and they They do laugh, but they're our friends too. So I don't know if if you got a caught, you know like a rumour strangers Are they gonna actually also fight a funny, but I could try See what happens. I think you'd learn something either way. Um, yeah, I kind of love Both the when you bomb and when when you do great just watching people how they deal with it It's so it's so difficult. It's so you're so fragile Up there. It's just you and you you're thinking you're gonna be funny and when it completely falls flat It's just it's beautiful to see people deal with like that Yeah, I might have enough material to do stand-up Night I've never thought about but I might have enough material um I don't know like 15 minutes or something. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Do do a Netflix special Netflix special sure Um, what's your favorite Rick and Morty concept? Just to spring that on you is there there's a lot of sort of scientific engineering ideas explored there There's the favorite Butter robot. It's great. Uh, it's great show. Yeah, Rick and Morty's awesome Somebody that's exactly like you from an alternate dimension showed up there. You're on tusk Yeah, that's right. You voiced. Yeah, Rick and Morty suddenly explores a lot of interesting concepts Uh, I like what's the favorite one I know that the butter robot certainly is uh You know, it's like it's certainly possible to have too much sentience in a device Um, like you don't want to have your toast to be like As super genius toaster. It's gonna hate hate life because we'll just make this toast, but if You know, it's like you don't want to have like super into out just stuck in a Very limited device um, do you think it's too easy from a if we're talk about from the engineering perspective of super intelligence like with Marvin the robot Like is it just it seems like it might be very easy to engineer just a depressed robot I get it. It's not obvious to engineer an robot that's going to Find a fulfilling existence same as humans I suppose but um, I wonder if that's like the default if you don't do a good job. I'm building a robot. It's going to be sad a lot Well, we can reprogram robots easier than we can reprogram humans so I guess if you let it evolve without Tinkering then it might get to a sad uh, but you can change the optimization function and have it be a cheery robot You uh, like I mentioned with with space sacks you give a lot of people hope and a lot of people look up to you millions of people look up to you If we think about young people in high school maybe in college um, what advice would you give to them about If they want to try to do something big in this world, they want to really have a big positive impact What advice would you give them about their career maybe about life in general Try to be useful um, you know, do things that are useful to your fellow human beings to the world. It's very hard to be useful um Very hard um, you know, are you contributing more than you consume, you know, like uh Like can you Try to have a positive net contribution to society um I think that's the thing to aim for you know not not to try to be sort of a leader for For the sake of being a leader or whatever um A lot of time with people who who you the a lot of time the people you want as leaders are other people who don't want to be leaders So um If you live a useful life That is a good life a life worth having lived um You know and I'd like to say I would I would encourage people to Use the mental tools of physics and apply them broadly in life There are the best tools when you think about education and self-education. What do you recommend? There's so there's the university there's uh self-study There is uh hands-on sort of finding a company or a place or a set of people that do the thing you're passionate about and joining them as early as possible um There's uh taking a road trip across Europe for a few years and writing some poetry which uh which which trajectory do you suggest? In terms of learning about how you can become useful as you mentioned how you can have the most positive impact What I'd encourage people to read a lot of books Just read like I mean basically try to ingest as much information as you can Uh and try to also just develop a good general knowledge um So you so you at least have like a rough lay of the land of the the knowledge landscape um like try to learn a little bit about a lot of things um because you might not know what you're really interested How would you know what you're really interested in if you at least aren't like doing it peripheral exploration or broadly of of the knowledge landscape um And you talk to people from different walks of life and different industries and professions and skills and actually archipagia's like just try to learn as much as possible Man's search for a meeting Isn't the whole thing a search for meaning? Is yeah, what's meeting a life and all you know But just generally like I said I would encourage people to read broadly um in many different subject areas um and and and then try to find something where there's an overlap of your talents and and what you're interested in so people may may be good at something but well they may have skill at a particular thing But they don't like doing it um So you want to try to find a thing where you have your That's a good a good combination of of your of the things that you're inherently good at but you also like doing um And reading is a super fast shortcut to to figure out which where are you both good at it you like doing it And it will actually have positive impact Well, you got to learn about things somehow so reading a broad range it's just really Read it You know one point was that kid I I read through the encyclopedia so that's pretty helpful um and uh There's also things that didn't even exist in a whole lot so obviously and It's like as broad as it gets Encyclopedias were digestible I think uh you know whatever 40 years ago um so um You know read through the the condensed version of the encyclopedia Britannica I'd recommend that um you can always like skip subjects though you read a few paragraphs and you know you're not interested Just jump to the next one So read the encyclopedia or scan skim skim through it um And um But I you know put a lot of stock and certainly have a lot of respect for someone who puts in an honest day's work to do useful things and and just generally to have like a not a zero-sum mindset um or a like have have more of a Grow the pie mindset like the If you if you sort of say like when we see people like perhaps um including some very smart people Kind of taking an attitude of like like like like like doing things that seem like morally questionable It's often because they have at at a base sort of axiomatic level a zero-sum mindset Um and and they without realizing it they don't realize they have a zero-sum mindset Or at least that they don't realize it consciously Um, and so if you have a zero-sum mindset then the only way to get ahead is by taking things from others But if if it's like if if if the if the if the pie is fixed Then the only way to have more pie is to take someone else's pie But but this is false like obviously the pie has grown dramatically over time the economic pie So the reality you can have the uh So overuse this analogy we have a lot of you can have this a lot of pie Yeah, my pie is not fixed uh, so you really want to make sure you don't you know operating um without realizing it from a zero-sum mindset Where where the only way to get ahead is to take things from others Then that's gonna result in you take try to take things from others, which is not not good. It's much better to work on uh Adding to the economic pie maybe you know, so You know creating like said create creating more than you consume doing more than you Yeah, um So that's that's a big deal. Um, I think there's like if you know fair number of people in in finance that Do you have a bit of a zero-sum mindset? I mean, it's all walks of life. I've that seen that one of the one of the reasons uh Rogan inspires me is he celebrates all there's a lot that is not Not creating a constant competition like there's a scarcity of resources What happens when you celebrate others? Any promote others? The ideas of others it it uh, it actually grows that pie. I mean it to every like the The resources the resources become less scarce And that that applies in a lot of kinds of domains it applies in academia where a lot of people are very See some funding for academic research is zero-sum and it is not if you celebrate each other if you make If you get everybody to be excited about AI about physics above mathematics I think it there'd be more and more funding and I think everybody wins. Yeah, that applies. I think broadly Yeah, yeah, I like that great. So last last question about love and meaning Uh, what is the role of love in the human condition broadly and more specific to you? How has love romantic love or otherwise made you a better person a better human being Better engineer Now you're asking really complexing questions um It's hard to give a I mean there were many Books poems and songs written about what is love and what is what is exactly you know um um Yeah, what is love figured out hurt me Um, but that's one of the great ones. Yes. Yeah, you've you've earlier quoted Shakespeare, but that that's really up there. Yeah I mean, not always a many splendid thing. Uh, I mean there's um it's because we've talked about so many inspiring things Like be useful in the world sort of like solve problems alleviate suffering, but It seems like connection between humans as a source You know, it's um It's a source of joy is a source of meaning and that that's what love is friendship love I just wonder if you think about that kind of thing when you talk about Preserving the light of human consciousness, right and us becoming a multiplicity multi-planetary species I mean to me at least um That that means like if we're just alone and conscious and intelligent It doesn't mean nearly as much as if we're with others Right, and there's some magic created when we're together the The the French of of it and I think the highest form of it is love which I think broadly is is much bigger than just sort of romantic but also yes romantic love and Family and those kinds of things. Well, I mean the reason I guess I care about That's becoming a multi-planet species and the space-prank civilization is foundationally I love humanity um and and so I wish to see it prosper and Do great things and be happy and Um, and if I did not love humanity, I would not care about these things So you look at the whole of it the human history all the people has ever lived all the people live now It's pretty We're okay And on the whole we're pretty interesting uh bunch Yeah all things considered And I've read a lot of history including the darkest worst parts of it and uh It just by all that I think on balance I still love humanity You joked about it with the 42 uh what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing? Is it like is there a non-human? Oh, I just like yeah, well really I think what Dr. Sallans was saying in Hitchhack's guy to the galaxy is that um The universe is the answer and uh What We really need to figure out are what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe? Yeah Um, and that the question is the really the hard part and if you can properly frame the question then the answer relatively speaking is easy uh So So therefore if if you want to understand What questions to ask about the universe you want to understand the meaning of life we need to Expand the scope and scale of consciousness So that there were better able to Understand the nature of the universe and and understand the meaning of life And ultimately the most important part will be to ask the right question Yes, uh By elevating the role of the interviewer Yeah, just like as the most important human in the room Absolutely interviewer good questions are You know it's a hard it's hard to come up with good questions Uh, absolutely um But yeah, like it's like that that is the foundation of my philosophy is that um, I am curious about the nature of the universe and uh You know and obviously I will die I don't know when I'll die but I won't live forever um But I would like to know that we are on a path to understanding the nature of the universe and the meaning of life and what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe and um and so if we expand the scope and scale of humanity and consciousness in general um, which includes silicon consciousness then That you know that that seems like a fundamentally good thing You know, I'm like I said um I'm deeply grateful that you will spend your extremely valuable time with me today and also that you are given millions of people hope in this Difficult time this divisive time And this uh cynical time so I hope you do continue doing what you're doing. Thank you so much for talking today Hi, you're welcome. Uh, thanks for excellent questions Thanks for listening to this conversation with Elon Musk support this podcast. Please check out our sponsors in the description And now let me leave you some words from Elon Musk himself When something is important enough you do it even if the odds are not in your favor Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time


